THE COLAS 


UY 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, m.a., 

Professor of Indian History and Archaeology 
University of Madras 


VOL. II (Part I) 



UNIVERSITY OF MADRAS 

« 

1937 


Thompson & Co., Ltd., 
Printers, 
Madras. 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I acknowledge with gratitude my obligations to 
Sir T. Desikachari and Mr. S. T. Srinivasagopalachari 
for permission to reproduce a selection of coins from 
their cabinets; to M. Rene Grousset for the photograph 
of the image of Nataraja belonging to Musee Guimet, 
Paris; and to Messrs. U. N. Ghosal and S. Desi- 
vinayagam Pillai for valuable suggestions relating 
to some matters dealt with in Vol. I and now 
reconsidered in the ‘Additions and corrections’ at the 
end of the present volume. Mr. S. Vaiyapuri Pillai; 
Reader in Tamil, and Editor, Tamil Lexicon, was 
good enough to read in manuscript the chapter on 
literature and make many valuable suggestions. 
Prof. K. Swaminathan of the Presidency College, 
Madras, kindly read the proofs, and Mr. S. R. Bala- 
subrahmanyam has laid me under a deep debt by 
undertaking the preparation of the index for this 
volume also. Ah’ thanks arc also due to the Archaeo- 
logical Survey of India for permission to consult 
unpublished inscriptions and reproduce photographs 
of which they own the copyright. 


University of Madras, 
nth March 1937. 


K. A. N. 




Chapter XIII 


KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 
The accession of Kulottunga I marks the 

a new epoch. comm encemcnt of a new era in the 

history of the Cola empire. At the end 
of nearly a century of dubious subordination to the 
Cola empire, the kingdom of Vengi now became 
definitely a province of the empire resuscitated by its 
own ruler. After Kulottunga became Cola emperor, 
Yengi wus ruled successively by his sons as viceroys, 
and this added greatly to the strength of the Cola 
empire by shutting the door against the intrigues of the 
Western Calukyas in that quarter. The first Calukya- 
Cola emperor soon overcame the troubles that 
threatened at his accession to bring about the collapse of 
the empire, and after establishing himself on his new 
throne, he had a long reign characterised, for the best 
part of it, by unparalleled success and prosperity, v He 
avoided unnecessary wars and evinced a true regard 
for the well-being of his subject^ The permanent 
results of his policy are seen in the reigns of his succes- 
sors.^ For about a century, until we reach the time of 
Kulottunga III, the empire, though not so extensive as 
before, still holds well together, and there is on the 
whole less of the chronic warfare of the age which 
preceded the accession of 1 Kulottunga. The impossible 
attempt to extend the empire across the Tungabhadra 
frontier into Rattapadi is definitely given up by 

■Kulottunga I, and he even puts up with some loss 

K— 1 



2 


THE CO^AS 


of territory in the Mysore country consequent on the 
rise of the Hoysalas about the close of his reign. And 
the loss of Vengi, though serious, was only temporary, 
as his successors recovered most of it. The wisdom of 


Kulottunga’s statesmanship lay in adjusting his aims 
to his resources, in his not forsaking the possible good 
in the pursuit of the impossible better, and in his 
preferring the well-being of his subjects to the 
satisfaction of his personal vanity. < He ensured for 
his subjects a century of peace and good (government., 

4Kulottunga ’s reign began approximately on the 
9th June 1070 A.D. 1 As he ruled for fifty years 

thereafter, 2 he must have been a young 
i ductiona. intr °" man hi® accession. The asterism of 

his birth was Pusya. 3 The numerous 
inscriptions of this long reign contain several prasastis, 
each with some variant form's. In the first four years 
the most common prasasti is the one commencing tiru 
manni vilanga or valara which records the achievements 
of Kulottunga (here called Rajendra) before he came 
to the Cola throne. These events have been discussed 


already in relation to the problem of his accession. The 
latest records containing this early prasasti arc dated 
in the fourth year. °The same events are also narrated 
in different words in another prasasti known so far only 
from one record of the sixth year at Tirukkovalur and 
commencing pu met arivaiytim. i % Yet another prasasti 


* EI. vii, p. 7, n. 5. 

1 El. iv, p. 227; 620 of 1920; 139 of 1902. A record of year 52 Is 
given in the Pudukkdffai Inscriptions No. 127. 

* 45 of 1921, ARE. 1929, II, 33. 

* 125 Of 1900- 



KCUIjOTTUNGtA I A.t). 1070-1X20 


a 


briefer and of far less historical value, also 
occurring in these four years, is that commencing 
pmniyum tiruvum, of which we have an expanded 
form in the rare introduction beginning pu maruviya 
tiriimadandaiyumJ’ The two most common forms 
of the prasastis of the reign are the short 
introduction commencing pugal-madti vilanga which 
begins to appear in the fourth year 6 and the longer 
one commencing pugal sulnda punari appearing for 
the first time in the fifth regnal year . 7 Of these it 
is the latter prasasti that is most helpful to the historian 
on account of the revisions undergone by it as the reign 
advances. Other prasastis are : pa mevi valara appear- 
ing in the ninth year , 8 pa mada valara in the year after 
that.," tirumagal juyamagal in the twelfth year , 10 and 
possibly also pa mada punara in a mutilated inscrip- 
tion 11 of which the date is lost. We must also take 
account of the double introduction, vlrame tunai 
followed by pugal mada vilanga , which couples a 
prasasti of Yirarajendra with that of Kulottunga and to 
which attention has been drawn already. This intio- 
duction is found as early as the fifth year in an 
inscription from Tribhuvani which also gives the 

• 425 of 1912. 

• 468 of 1913. 

7 SII> iii, 68, 69 etc. It must be noticed that this pra&asii opens with a 
reference to the youthful achievements of Kulottunga followed by a 
rhetorical euiogium, of no historical value. 1 think this part ends with the 
phrase: tan pon-nat/ar-pujrattKfuik-kidappa, 

8 67 of 1898. 

• 124 of 1928. 

10 231 of 1912. 

11 365 of 1928. 



4 


THE CO^AS 


v TribhuvanacahravarLin, / title of Kulottunga. 12 It is 
seen from the inscriptions of the reign now accessible 
to us that the titles Kulottunga and Cakravartin were 
also assumed by the emperor much earlier in his reign 
than was once thought. / 


Early wars. 


Of the early wars fought by Kulottunga in his 
youth ( ilangdp-paruvani ), some account has been given 

in discussing his position between 1063 
and 1070 A.D. It has been pointed out 
that he levied tribute from the(Nagavamsi ruler Dhara- 
varsa and possibly also carved out for himself a separate 
and independent principality in that quarter] The first 
few lines of the prasasti beginning pugal sulnda punari 
refer to the same events and add that by the strength of 
his arm he routed an army of the king of Kuntala. 13 
and thus douued the garland of victory in the North 
before he turned his attention to the South. This war 
with the king of Kuntala, doubtless the Western 
Calukya king, waged before 1070 A.D., was part of 
Kulottunga ’s activity in the region of the modern Bastar 
state, and the circumstances that, led to this conflict are 
the same as those recorded in some of the later inscrip- 
tions of Virarajendra and in Bilhapa’s. account of 
Vikramaditya’s dig vi jay a in so far as it relates to Veng i 
andTDakrakuta! After” Som'esvara I failed to turn up 


12 197 of 1919. Hultzsch did not know of any inscription earlier than 
the twentieth year giving the Tribhuvanacakravartin title. KI7. iii, p. 131. 
It may also be noted that the earliest record certainly giving the titles 
Cakravartin and Kulottunga is 468 of 1913 (of the fourth year) with 
the pugal rnddu vi\anga introduction. 

13 8/7. iii, pp. 142, 146. R. D. Banerji has strangely misunderstood 
the early inscriptions of Kulottunga and cited them as proving that 
Kulottunga defeated Lak§ma-deva of Majava in Cakrakhta (Haitiayas of 
lripuri , p. 25). 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


5 


for the second encounter fixed to take place at Kudal- 
Sangama, Virarajendra threw down a challenge to the 
Vallabha (Calukya), proceeded to recover Vengi, and 
after the victory of Bezwada, bestowed that kingdom 
once more on Vijayaditya VII. These data corroborate 
Bilhana’s statements that in his war-like career as 
yuvardja Vikramaditya had conquered Vengi and 
Cakrakuta, and was encamping on the banks of the 
Krsua when the news of his father’s illness and death 
reached him. The K a Jin <jatf up par an i 1 1 also implies 
that Vikramaditya fought against Kulottunga in the 
north at this time and that it was in this war that 
Kulottunga earned the title V iruda rajabhayankara. i.e. 
terror to Virudaraja or Vikramaditya. These events 
took place in 1067 A.D. And now it becomes clear from 
Kulottunga ’s prasasti that his northern adventure 
might have helped Virarajendra in the war against 
Vikramaditya. Whether this means that Kulottunga, 
on his own account, repulsed Vikramaditya ’& attack on 
Cakrakuta, or whether we may infer further that 
Kulottunga co-operated with Virarajendra and was 
^present at the battle of Bezwada, it is not easy to decide. 
In any case, the effective assistance of Kulottunga in the 
release of Vengi from the Western Calukya hold shows 
that Kulottunga might have been on friendly relations 
with Virarajendra and kept up a live interest in the 
affairs of the Vengi and Cola kingdoms. That, as a 
result of the wars, the kingdom of Vengi was restored 
to Vijayaditya gives us the measure of the truth of 
Kulottunga ’s statement made later to his son Rajaraja 

,4 x.v. 2$. 



6 


'.THE CO^AS 


that in his youth he preferred a life of war and 
adventure and so left the kingdom of Yengi to be ruled 
by his uncle Vijayaditya. It is probable that this exile 
was not altogether voluntary and was in the first 
instance brought about by the hostile ambitions of 
Vijayaditya, 16 


The death of Virarajendra after he had made his 

peace with Vikramaditya VI, the aeees- 
A< C6ia ^ throne. 16 sion °f Adhirajendra, and the revolution 

in the Cola country that was arrested 
for a time by Vikramaditya ’s intercession, but, after 
the retirement of Vikramaditya to the Tungabhadra, 
ran its full course and ended fatally for Adhirajendra, 


gave Kulottunga the opportunity to make himself 
master of the Cola kingdom. The theory of a civil war 

i 

between Adhirajendra and Kulottunga that has some- 


times been put forward 1 6 gets no support from the 
inscriptions, and appears highly improbable. There is 
likewise no warrant for the view that Kulottunga at 


first gained control of a part of the Cola kingdom and 
became master of the whole of it only at the end of four 


or five years of fighting, 17 or that he killed many princes 
of the blood to clear his way to the throne. 18 The 


inscriptions of Kulottunga, however, agree with the 
Kalingattupparani in stating that his advent to the 
South rescued the Cola country from' a state of anarchy 
and dissolution, and restored unity and order in that 
land. The inscriptions say: “In the South, he put on 


,5 See ante , Cli. xii. 

18 ARE. 1904, paragraph 21. 

1 *SII. iii, p. 132. ARE. 1904, paragraph 21. 
19 ARE. 1899, paragraph 51. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


7 


the pure jewelled crown by right so as to put an end to 
the commonness of the goddess 19 of the sweet smelling 
lotus-flower (Laksmi) and the loneliness of the good 
earth-maiden who had the Ponni (Kaveri) for her gar- 
ment.” There is not the slightest suggestion here of 
any opposition encountered by Kulottunga in the Cola 
country; rather his advent is said to have been quite 
welcome, if not actually sought after. Writing some 
years later, when Kulottunga had, by his wise and strong 
rule, secured for the people of the empire several years 
of continued peace and prosperity, Jayangondar draws 
in deeper colours his picture of the anarchy that 
preceded the advent of Kulottunga : 20 

“Brahmanieal sacrifices were given up; the path of Manu 
was totally deserted; the six sciences were forgotten and the 
chanting of the Vedas ceased. 

“The castes mixed one with another in wild confusion; none 
keeping to their prescribed paths of duty, (the code of proper) 
conduct was forgotten. 

“Each sought to tyrannise the others, the temples of the 
gods were neglected; women lost their chastity; and fortresses 
fell into ruin. 

“While the darkness of Kali was thus spreading, he 
(Abhaya) came to the rescue of the world, like the sun rising 
above the roaring sea and driving away darkness. 

“He made it his duty to create afresh all the safeguards (for 
the people), lie restored all the (old) rules and again established 
the earth on the proper path. 

“Amidst the roar of the four oceans and the chanting of the 
four Vedas, and the blessings of the three worlds, he w&- 
anointed.” 

,# See ante, Ch. xii, p. 358 n. 

*°KaUngattupparani } x , vv. 27-32. TA. xix, p. 332. 



8 


THE CGl^AS 


We may recognise a substratum of fact beneath the 
exaggerations of this conventional picture of anarchy. 
Though the true course of events is obscure, and the 
hypothesis of religious persecution leading to a political 
revolution rests on vague and confused tradition, it is 
clear that the prospect was gloomy indeed when 
Kulottunga came to rule over the Co]a dominion. War 
and rebellion had raised their heads, and the southern 
portions of the empire including Ceylon had proclaimed 
their independence. Kulottunga devoted the first few 
years of his reign to deal with these troubles. 



e first enemy to be dealt with 


was the Western 


/ War with Vikra- 
m&ditya. 


Cajukya Vikramaditya VI,J who now 
found that all his efforts to extend 


his power to Yengi had proved futile, 


and what was worse, that Yengi became more 
closely united than ever to the hostile power of the 
Colas. Vikramaditya was therefore sure to oppose 
Kulottunga ’s accession and lead an expedition against 
him. Kulottunga lost no time in strengthening him- 
self by fresh alliances. There was no love lost between 
Vikramaditya and his elder brother Som'esvara II, who 
had been compelled by Virarajendra to part with some 
of his territory to Vikramaditya , 21 and it was obvious 
that Kulottunga could make a successful appeal to 
Somesvara for assistance in the war against his brother ; 

and that was what he did. Says Bilhana : 22 


“After the lapse of only a few days, when the Cola’s son 
(Adhirajendra) was slain in a rebellion of his subjects, the lord 


,t Ante, 1, p. 334. 
**vi, 26-27; 38-9; 64, 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


9 


of Vengi, Kajiga by name, took possesion of his throne by the 
concurrence of fortune. This crooked-minded man suspected 
danger from him (Vikramaditya), and in order to create a 
diversion in his rear, he put himself straight with Somadeva, his 

(Vikramaditya ’s) natural enemy What has this noble-minded 

(Vikramaditya) done to his elder brother, that tiie latter should, 
with indent to injure him, enter into a compact with their family 
foe, the Cola Kajiga? When the king’s son (Vikramaditya) 
started on his expedition for the chastisement of the impolitic 
Kajiga, Somadeva pursued him quickly at the back with his 

entire forces When the mass of the Dravida army drew 

near the liberal-lianded prince (Vikramaditya), this king 
(Somes vara) also approached, having gained at last an 

opportunity of injuring (him ).” 23 


Vikramaditya was also very ably assisted in the 
campaign by a number of liis allies and vassals. The 
Yadava king of Pevagiri h elped him as an ally ." 4 
Among the vassals present with Vikramaditya were the 
Hoysala Ere van ga 25 and Tribhuvanamalla Pandya 30 
' " besides the Kadamba Jayakesi, already 

Bahama’s account, mentioned as the ally oL‘ Vikramaditya. 

According - to Billiana’s account, at the 
end of a hard contest in which the armies of Somesvara 
and Kulottuuga engaged the forces of Vikrama, “the 


**Buhler has rightly exposed tlie hollowness of the moralisings of 
Bilhapa and pointed out that far from being a victim of destiny, as 
Bilhapa wishes to make out, Vikrama designedly used his superior talents 
to oust his weaker brother. Vikrama, who married a Cola princess in 
order to be able to deprive his brother of a good part of his inheritance, 
could not well object to S6me§vara’s political alliance with Kuldttunga. 
Buhler's Viler amdn kad eva carita, pp. 36-8 and nn. Fleet was the first to 
recognise that Rajiga is a familiar form of Rajendra, the earlier name of 
Kuloltunga. IA. xx, pp. 276 and 282. See also BO. I, ii, p. 445. 

24 RG. I, ii, p. 234. 

Z *EC. v. Ak. 102 (a) says that by order of the Cajukya Cakravarti he 
caused the Cola king to wear leaves: COliloar annalcyam taliram utfisi. 
Also vii, Sh. 64. 

**EC. vii, Ci. 33 calls him (Rd) jiga-CdJa-mandhhanga, and says, 
perhaps with exaggeration, that he was ixiliiig Nujambava<ji 32000. 

K — 2 



10 


THE CO^AS 


Dravida lord fled the field and Somadeva entered the 

* 

prison ”. 27 Vikrama then retired to the Tungabhadra. 
He intended to restore his captive brother to liberty 
and to the throne, but, as on the eve of the battle, Siva 
interposed a second time in a dream and commanded 
Vikrama to assume the sovereignty himself , 28 and he did 
so. He also made his younger brother Jayasimha 
viceroy at Banavase . 20 After some further expeditions 
and conquests, of which no details are forthcoming, and 
after once more extinguishing the valour of the Co]a , 30 
he duly entered his capital Kalyana. 

w* * - „ _ k * - 

As may be expected, the account of the campaign 

found in Cola inscriptions differs in 
coia version. many details and in the result of the 

fight; the subsequent course of events 
shows, however, that this version is on the whole nearer 
the truth than the kdvya of Bilhana. 

“Not only did the speech (of Vikkalan) — ‘After this day a 
permanent blemish (will attach to Kulottunga), as to the crescent 
(which is the origin) of (his) family’ — turn out wrong, but the 
bow (in) the hand of Vikkalan was not (even) bent against (the 
enemy ). 31 Everywhere from Nangili of rocky roads — with 
Manaliir in the middle — to the Tungabhadra, there were lying 

low the dead (bodies of his) furious elephants, his lost pride and 
(his) boasted valour. The very mountains which he ascended 

* T vi 90. 

**See Buhler’s remarks cited in a previous note. 
a *vl 99, xiv, 4. 

*°nirvdpya COJasya punah pratdpam kramena Kalydnam asau vivetia, 

vii 2. 

#J The pun on the verb k6$utal in the original is untranslatable. I 
follow Hultzsch’s translation ( SII . iii, p. 147) with slight changes. 
177 of 1919, year (6), and 5 of 1914 (year 8) seem to be among the 
earliest inscriptions giving this version of the events. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


11 


bent their backs, the very rivers into which (he) descended 
eddied and breached (the banks) in their course: (and) the very 
seas into which he plunged became troubled and agitated. (The 
Coja king) seized simultaneously the two countries ( pdni ) called 
Gangamandalam and Singanam, troops of furious elephants 
which had been irretrievably abandoned (by the enemy), crowds 
of women with beautiful lustrous eyes, the goddess of fame who 
gladly brought disgrace (on Yikkalan), and the great goddess of 
victory who changed to the opposite side and caused (Vikkalan) 
himself and his father, who were desirous of the rule over the 
western region, to turn their backs again and again on many 
days. ’ ’ 

Some earlier versions of these incidents substitute 
the general phrase Velkulattarasar or Velpulatta rasu 
i.e. the Calukyan king or kings, for Vikkalan, and the 
specific place-name Alatti for the region from Nangili 
to Tungabhadra. 32 

The earliest allusion to this war traceable in the 

inscriptions of the reign occurs in the 

Date. * ° 

words : “ V ikkalan and Singanan plung- 
ing into the western sea”, found in the pugal mddu 
ihtroduction for the first time in the seventh year. 33 
The actual fight with Vikram'aditya took place, there- 
fore, some years after Kulottunga’s reign began and 
not, as Bilhana’s narrative implies, immediately after 
his accession. This is also borne out by Calukya 
inscriptions which place these occurrences in the expired 
Saka year 998, or A.D. 1076. 34 The interval of five or 
six years was doubtless employed by both sides in 
preparations, diplomatic and military, for the coming 

*• 811 . ill. 73; 5 of 1914; 178 of 1919. 

**401 of 1896. 

»*£<?. I, il, p. 217. 



12 


l-HE COLAS 


fight . For Vikramaditya would not acquiesce without 
a struggle in the permanent, union of Vengi and Cola 
in the same hands, and Kuldttuuga knew this very well. 

The war began with an advance of Vikramaditya 
into the Cola territory t ill he encountered the Cola army 

in the Kolar district, whence, if the Cola 
C °resuits a of the inscriptions may be trusted, Vikra- 
war ' maditya was pursued by the Cola forces, 

through Manalur , 89 not identified, up to the banks of 
the Tungabhadra ; and there was heavy fighting all 
along the road. In the result, the Cdl.a ruler, besides 
capturing much valuable booty, became master of the 
Ganga-mandalam and (Singanam. The identity of 
Singanam is doubtful ; Hultzsch suggested that it 
means the dominions of Jayasimha III : but the 
territory ruled over by Jayasimha III was Banavase 
and not only is there no evidence of the present 
campaign having extended to that country, but Bilhana 
says that Vikramaditya made his brother Jayasimha 
ruler of Banavase at the end of the war with 
Kulottunga, and that Jayasimha was still in charge of 
that territory some years later when he revolted against 
his brother and sought the assistance of Kulottunga. 

It is probable, however, that before the war began, 
Jayasimha was in charge of some territory to the south 
and east of the Tungabhadra. Kulottunga ’s claim that, 
as a result of the war, he found himself in possession of 
a considerable jlart of the Mysore country is borne out 
by the provenance of his inscrip tion s, and Bilhana ’s 

,5 A pitched battle seems to have been fought there. Rating at tup* 
parapiy xiii, 62. 

•*SII. iii, P. 144. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


13 


statement that Kulottunga fled from the battlefield is 
not to be trusted. The Kaliiigai lupparani 37 mentions 
some of the incidents of this war such, as the fights at 
Alatti and M analur, and the capture of elephants in 
Navilai, possibly the same as Navile-nad of the Mysore 
inscriptions . 38 The Vikramcisolan-ula states that 
Kulottunga reached the Western sea, and captured 
Konkana and Kannada countries and humbled the pride 
of the Mahratha king — a statement which implies that 
even Banavase might have been overrun, though per- 
haps only for a time. The worst sufferer was 
Somesvara II, who fell into the hands of his brother as a 
prisoner and thus lost his kingdom. What ultimately 
became of him is not known. 3 ” 


v/ 

Bilhana says that Jayasimha, the newly appointed 

viceroy of Banavase, contemplated trea- 
simha son against his brother V lkramaditya, 

within a year after his appointment, and 
that he sought the aid of Kulottunga in his attempted 
revolt . 40 It is not necessary to pursue the story of this 
rebellion here ; for Bilhana ’s account makes it clear that 
Kulottunga took little or no part in the civil war that 
followed. This was obviously because he had more 
important affairs claiming his attention. Yikramaditya, 
thus left free to deal with the rebellion, suppressed it 
without any difficulty, and, as we shall see, soon began 
to add to the troubles of Kulottunga by establishing 


* 7 xi, vr. 74, 75; xiii, 62. 
,e ET. vl, pp. 69, 214-5. 
•°BG. I, H, p. 445. 

<0 xlv — vv. 1-13. 



14 


THE CO^AS 


friendly relations with his enemies. Soon after 
Vijayabaku proclaimed himself ruler of the whole of 
Ceylon after his expulsion of the Colas from the 
northern half of the island, Vikramaditya sent him a 
friendly embassy with rich presents. 41 In fact, through- 
out his long reign Vikramaditya was untiring in the 
pursuit of his design against Kulottmiga in all possible 
quarters. But Bilhana ’s rhapsodic account of a final 
expedition against Kafici for the exercise of his hero’s 
arms itching for a fight in the absence of suitable foes, 42 
can hardly be accepted as true. 


While Kulottunga was settling his affairs in the 

south, the kingdom of Vengi in the 

'oreign invasion 

in vengi. north was invaded by Yasahkarnadeva, 

the Haihaya ruler of Tripuri. In his 
inscriptions, dating from 1072-3 A.B., this king claims 
to have easily overcome the strong ruler of the 
Andhra country and to have propitiated Bhagavan 
Bhlmesvara of Draksarama with presents of many 
costly jewels. 43 The Andhra ruler mentioned was no 
doubt Vijayaditya VII. Yasahkarna’s inroad does not 
seem to have had any consequences, military or political, 
worth mentioning. And there is no proof that it was 
in any manner connected with the designs of the 
Western Cajukyas or of Vijayaditya VII, as has some- 
times been assumed. 44 


* X CV, ch. 60, v. 24, Codrington, A Short History of Ceylon , p. 67. 

4 2 xvii, vv. 43 If.; cf. BO. I, ii, pp. 452-3. 

4Z E1. xii, pp. 208 If. R. D. Banerji (Haihayas of Tripuri , p. 26) identi- 
fies the Andhra king with one of the sons of Kuldttunga. This is clearly 
wrong. 

“JAHftS. v. pp. 208-9., 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


15 


x At the close of his war with Vikramaditya VI, 

^ j in n- ■ * **• I* Itt* ^ iKiAnnM 

Kulottunga turned attention to the 
^eyioneee^affairs. Soufh7 The Pandya country was never 

-■ » »« lw V— ft Jft- ft. 

- ' reconciled - to the imposition of Cola 

overlordship, and its rulers had always been a source of 

trouble to the most powerful Cola emperors. The 

period of confusion that followed the death of Vira- 

rajendra, the popular rebellion against his successor 

Xdhirajendra, and the hard struggle forced on 

Kulottunga in the early years of his reign by the policy 

of Vikramaditya VI, provided a golden opportunity to 

the kingdoms of the south to reassert their 

independence. . The administrative arrangements made 

by the Colas in these lands went to pieces, and the native 

rulers of the countries began to rule in their own right 

as their inscriptions show. 45 The most sustained efforts 

of Kulottunga resulted in the reconquest of the Pandya 

and Kerala countries between the seventh and eleventh 

years of his reign, but Ceylon permanently disappeared 

from the Cola empire. Some account may be given of 

the establishment of Ceylonese independence before the 

story of the reconquest of the South is taken up. ' 

\ 

J5fe have seen that before the accession of 

V Irara j endra, the Singalese prince Kitti 
ceyion. freed Rohana of enemies and, in 1058, 

assumed the title Vijayabahu in his seventeenth year. 40 
Cola rule was thereafter confined to the northern part 
of the island known as Rajarattha. The latest Cola 
inscription found at Polonnaruwa is dated 1070 A.D., 

48 PK. pp. 118 ff. 

"Ante, i, pp. 803, 332. 



16 


THE COJjAS 


the third and last year of the reign of Adhirajendra. 
The disappearance of Cola power from Rajarattha is 
clearly narrated in the Mahavamm. The chronicle 
does not give exact dates for all the transactions 
recorded; but it says definitely that Vijayabahu I 
entered Anuradhapura in the fifteenth year of his 
Rohana ruie and thirty-third of his life, in 1073 A.D. 
and that two years later, there took place his coronation 
as ruler of all Ceylon. 47 This is in perfect accord with 
what we know otherwise of the first five years of 
Kulottunga’s reign and with the absence of any Cola 
inscription of Kulottunga’s reign in Ceylon. The 
Mahavamsa says 4R that the successful efforts of Vijaya- 
bahu to liberate Ceylon from the Co] as began in the 
twelfth year of his reign, A.D. 1070. He took up his 
abode in the fortress on the Paluttha mountain, round 


which ‘a terrible fight betweeh~the~-two armies took 
place’. The Damila army was put to flight, and in the 
pursuit that followed, the Cola general was captured 


and decapitated. Then Vijayabahu occupied Pulatthi- 
nagara without any further resistance from the Tamils. 
But soon a larger Cola army came from the mainland, 
and there ensued another ‘fiery battle’ near Anuradha- 

* nrr-j. urn 

pura ; victory was with the Cola army, and Vijayabahu 
was compelled to fortify himself at Vatagiri, in the 
Kegalla District. 40 The Colas now stirred up rebellion 

.. .. n itwi t * 

against Vijayabahu in the rear, but the king of Ceylon 
successfully stamped it out, and forced the leader of 


* 7 CV., ch. 58, v. 59; ch. 69, w. 8-9. EZ. 11, p. 207. 
4# Ch. 58, vv. 18 ff. 

4 •Geiger, CV. U p. 204 n. 2. 



KULOTTUNGA X A.D. 1070-1120 


17 


the revolt to seek refuge with the Colas. Vijayabahu 
then proceeded ‘to Tambalagama where he erected a 

m .Autu n ** un Ua. ikWI . 1.1 ■ * 

new stronghold, ’ and taking up his residence in Maha- 
nagakula on the lower Walawe Ganga, he madtTfresh 
preparations for the Cola war. He despatched two 
armies to attack the position of the Colas from two 
sides: one by the coast highroad against Polonnaruwa, 
and the other to the west of the mountain system 
against Anuradh apura . The king himself advanced by 
Mahiyaganga. Polonnaruwa fell after severe fighting, 
and “when the ruler of the Colas heard of this destruc- 
tion of his army, he thought: the Slhalas are (too) 
strong, and sent out no further army. ’ ’ Anuradhapura 
was captured by the other section of the Ceylonese army 
which pushed forward to Mahatittha. Vijayabahu, ‘the 
best of kin gs, g reatly rejoicing, advanced in the fifteenth 
year (of his reign) to the greatly longed for, the best 
(town of) Anuradhapura’. His coronation as ruler of 
Lanka was delayed By~a "rebellion, and took place in his 
eighteenth year, A.D. 1076-7. Polonnaruwa now lost 
its Cola title and was styled Vijayarajapura. 60 
Vijayabahu married LTlavati, daughter "df Pagatlpala 
of Kanauj,, whose queen had escaped from captivity in 
the Cola country, and also T rilokasundar i of the 
Kalinga royal race, while his sister Mitta espoused a 
'Pandyan prince, who became the grandfather of 
Parakramabahu the Great. ‘ The king restored the 
Buddhist religion, renewing the priestly succession 
from Ramanna (Pegu), and caused a temple for the 
tooth relic to be built at the capital by his general 

•°600 of 1912, 811. iv. 1896, 1. 17. 

K— 3 



18 


THE CO^AS 


Nuvaragiri ’. 01 The inscriptions of Kulottunga are 
silent on the loss of Ceylon. " 


1 The declaration of independence by Ceylon did not 

involve so great a subtraction from the 
T ^ an plenitude of Cola power as the revolt of 

the southern kingdoms on the mainland. 
The Cola empire had nothing to fear from the inde- 
pendence of Ceylon if only it kept its power on the 
mainland unimpaired. The case of the Pandyan 
kingdom was different. If the Cola king failed to 
reduce it to subjection, it was sure to become a menace 
to the very existence of the Cola power. Kulottunga 
knew this, and the moment he found himself free from 
the Calukya war, he bent all his energies towards the 
suppression of revolts in the Pandya and Kerala 
countries. 


Records of the fifth year of the reign contain a 
vague statement that the head of the Pandya king lay 
on the ground peeked by kites ; later inscriptions 
say that this was outside the beautiful city of 
Kulottunga . 52 If is clear that these statements are not 
meant to be taken literally, and that they are no more 
historical than the exaggerated phrases of conventional 
praise that precede them in the inscriptions. For a 


81 Codrington, op. cit., p. 57. 

88 SII. ill, 68, 1. 2 and 69, 1. 10. An inscription from PalaiyaSivaram 
(Ch.), 211 of 1922, though it is of the tenth year, giyes only the general part 
of the pugal Hlnda punari introduction, including the statement about the 
P&pgyan king’s head, and makes no mention of the wars; this is perhaps 
because it gives the prafasti as it stood in the fourth year of the reign 
when the chief transaction recorded in the inscription took place. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.t). 1076-1120 


19 


more business-like account of the southern campaign, 
we must turn to the additional matter that begins to 
appear in the pugal sulnda punari introduction from 
the eleventh year , 88 and to some other inscriptions of 
the reign. 

(An midated Sanskrit inscription from Cidam- 
baram 84 states that Kulottunga overcame five Pandya 
kings, set fire to the fortress of Kottaru (like Arjuna 
burning the Khandava forest), subdued the numerous 
forces of the Keralas, and erected a pillar of victory ' 
on the sea-coast ; thus it was that he reduced to obedience 
(savidhikam akarot) the rebellious group of vassal 
kings. The more detailed account given by the Tamil 
inscriptions is as follows : 58 

“Having resolved in his mind to conquer the Pandi- 
mandalam together with great fame, he despatched his great 
army,—' which possessed excellent horses resembling the waves of 
the sea, war-elephants resembling, ships, and infantry resembling 
water, — as though the Northern ocean was over bowing the 
Southern ocean. He completely destroyed the forest which the 
five Pandyas had entered as refuge when they fled cowering with 
fear, from the field of battle. He subdued their country, drove 
them into hot jungles in hills where woodmen roamed about, and 
planted pillars of victory in every direction. He seized the pearl 
fisheries, the Podiyil mountain where the three kinds of Tamil 
flourished, the Saiyya mountain in the heart of which were found 
furious rutting elephants, and Kanni, and fixed the boundaries 
of the Southern (Pandya) country. While all the Savers in 

"186 of 1914. 

**EI. v, pp. 103*4. 

•WJ. iii, p. 147. 



•the CO^AS 


2 0 

the Western hill-country ascended to the unique heaven (attained 
by warriors who fell fighting) he was pleased to bestow on his 
commanders, who were mounted on horses, settlements on every 

road, including one at Kottaru, to strike terror into his enemies.” 

The V ikrmnasolan-ida ?' 1 describes Kulottunga as 

the king with the army which routed the carp of the 

enemy (Pandya), destroyed the bow (emblem of the 

Cera) and twice destroyed the fleet at Salai. The 

K alingat tupparani confirms these accounts : 57 

* 

“Have you not heard o£ the destruction that overtook the 
five Pandyas when his army was despatched against them? Has 
it not reached your cars that the Ceras turned their backs when 
the (Cola) army marched to the fight? Was it not with the 
army that Vilinam on the sea was destroyed, and Salai 
captured? ” 

These accounts of the conquest of the Pandyas 
and Ceras, the fights at Kottaru, Vilinam and Salai are 
substantially true; the Kulottunga-sdlan Pillaittamil 
mentions also a battle of Semponmari (Ramnad Dt .).® 8 
The decimation of the ranks of Savers , veteran 
soldiers who had banished from their hearts all fear of 
death and who formed a considerable section of the 
forces of the Pandyas 59 and the Ceras, must have been 
the result of very hard fighting. The identity of th£ 
five Pandyas conquered by Kulottunga remains 

••11. 46-8. 

#7 xi, vv. 70-2. The Questions are addressed to Anantavarman of 
Kalinga by one of his ministers to show him that Kulottunga's army was 
a tried force able to do great deeds even in the absence of Kulottunga. 

«v. 10. 

"Studies, p. 191. 



ItULOTTUNGA 1 A.D. 1070-1120 


21 


obscure ; 60 even Jutavar man Siivallabha was not one of 
them, but seems to have begun his rule sometime after 
Kulottunga ’s conquest and settlement of the southern 
country. Kulottunga was evidently not in a position to 
restore the Cola administrative arrangements intro- 
duced into the Pandya country by Rajaraja I, and he 
hit upon the device of establishing military colonies 
(nilai p-padai) along the important routes of communi- 
cation in the Pandya and Keraja territory. Except for 
the presence of these military outposts, the symbols of 
Cola overlordship, the attempt to change place-names 
to commemorate Cola titles ,” 1 and the collection of an 
annual tribute from the subordinate rulers of these 
districts, there was no attempt on the part of 
Kulottunga to interfere with their internal administra- 
tion. The numerous inscriptions of the Pandyan kings 
of this period betray few signs of their political subjec- 
tion to the CSlas, and the inscriptions of Kulott ung a 
and his successors are not found in such numbers in 
this area as in the territories under their direct rule . 63 

*°PK. t pp. 120-2; 21 of 1927 of the tenth year of Jsl\. Srlvallabha men- 
tions the 31st year of Kulottunga who took Kollam, doubtless Kulottunga I. 
Kulottunga 'b reconquest of the South was over by his eleventh year, 
A.D. 1081. Srlvallabha’s tenth year is later than the thirty-first of 
Kulottunga, i.e. A.D. 1101, so that Srivallabha's rule did not begin earlier 
than A.D. 1091. This means that he could not have been among the 
PftQdyas attacked and overthrown by KulOttunga’s forces. It also means 
that at the end of his campaign, Kulottunga had to allow the princes of 
the ancient Pandya line to continue their rule in full regal style though 
under the suzerainty of the C6Ja power. It is clear that the system of 
appointing COJa princes as COla-P&pdya viceroys was not resumed by 
Kulottunga. The PApdyan kingdom then seems to have stood in this 
period in the same relation to the COJa power as Vengi did between 
A.D. 1000 and 1070. 

^Vilifiam is called Rajendra^ojia-pattinam in an inscription of the 
21st year (46 of 1927). The Nilaippa^ai of KOftar mentioned in the 
39th year. (TAS, i, pp. 246-7). 

•v**, 1927 II, 18, 



THE COtiAS 



About fifteen years after this reconquest and settle- 
ment of the Southern country there seems to have been 

another revolt in which Venad took the 
preasion. lead. This tact is to be inferred from 

the considerable number of inscriptions 
which describe the services of Naralokavlra, the earliest 
date occurring in these inscriptions being the twenty- 


eighth year of the reign of Kulottunga . 63 The interval 
between the close of the first Pandyan war of the reign 
and the first mention of Naralokavlra in its inscriptions, 
and the frequent mention of Kalingaraya, one of" the 
titles of Naralokavlra, in the inscriptions of Jata- 
varman Srivallabha, render it likely that the Southern 
campaign in which this commander distinguished him- 
self, was different from the war in the early years of the 
reign . 64 The enemies dealt with and the places which 
formed the centres of conflict were naturally more or 
less the same as in the earlier war; the result was also 
the same. 


The success of Vijayabahu in establishing the 
independence of Ceylon by putting an end to Cola 
power in the island rankled in the mind of Kulottunga 
who was waiting for a favourable opportunity to renew 


'•Studies, pp. 178 ff. 

,4 It is not impossible, however, that Naralokavlra fought as a common 
soldier in the earlier war, that there was no second war at all, and that 
when* later on, he rose to a high position in the state, his earlier 
fights were painted in glowing colours. The point is that as Naralokavlra 
survived Kulottunga and held office under Vikrama Cdja for six or seven 
years, he could not have been old enough to have attained high rank 
in the army in the early years of KulOttunga’s reign. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


23 


the war with the Ceylonese ruler. 85 The Tamil popula- 
tion in Ceylon was quite considerable, and Tamil 
mercenaries formed a large part of the Singalese army 
at this time. 85a This was the natural result of the recent 
change of rulers brought about by Vijayabahu in tho 
northern half of the island. But as the Tamils were 
loyal to the memory of the Cola rule, still fresh in their 
minds, Kulottunga found favourable conditions for 
furthering his designs against the Ceylonese ruler in 
secret. The following account, given by the Mahdvamsa 
of the occurrences about A.D. 1088 sheds a lurid light 
on the policy of Kulottunga : 08 

“Envoys sent by the Kannata Monarch and by the Cola King 
came hither with rich presents. They sought out the Monarch. 
He was greatly pleased thereat and after rendering both embassies 
what was their due, he sent at first with the Kannata messengers 
his own envoys to Kannata with choice gifts. But the Cdlas 
maimed the noses and ears of the Sihala messengers horribly 
when they entered their country. Thus disfigured they returned 
hither and told the King everything that had been done to them 
by the Cola King. In flaming fury Vijayabahu in the midst of 
all his courtiers had the Damija envoys summoned and gave them 
the following message for the Cola king. 4 Beyond ear-shot, on a 
lonely island in the midst of the ocean shall a trial of the strength 
of our arms take place in single combat, or, after arming the 
whole forces of thy kingdom and of mine a battle shall be fought 

“ Paranavitana says (El. xviii, p. 333), that the Tirukkalukkunr&m 
inscription (I A. xxi, p. 282) of Kulottunga claims that he sent an 
expedition to Ceylon without any definite results. In saying this, he 
overlooks the more reliable edition of the inscription by Hultzsch, SIL iii, 
75, and in particular note 10 at p. 164. 

“‘Inscription No. 509 of Ceylon dated 1114 A.D., that is some years 
after the suppression of the military revolt, mentions Sedarftyan alias 
Malaimapdala N&yakan, a Vejaikkaran of Jayabfihudevar. Ceylon Journal 
of Science — G. ii, p. 122. 

ff CV . i, pp. 216-8. 



24 


THE COLAS 


at a spot to be determined by thee; exactly in the manner I have 
said it shall ye report to your master’. After these words he 
dismissed the envoys clad in women’s apparel in haste to the Cola 
King, then he betook himself with his army to Anuradhapura. 
To the seaports Mattikavatatittha and Mahatittha he sent two 

generals to betake themselves to the Cola kingdom and begin the 
war. While the generals were procuring ships and provisions in 
order to send the troops to the Cola kingdom, then, in the 
thirtieth year (of the king’s reign), the division of the troops 
called Velakkara revolted as they did not want to go thither. 
They slew the two generals and like rutting elephants in their 
unbridledness, they plundered the country round Pulatthinagara. 
They captured the younger sister of the King with her three sons 
and burned down with violence the King’s palace. The King 
left the town and betook himself in haste to Dakkinadesa and 
having hidden all his valuable possessions on the Vatagiri rook, 

he advanced together with the Uparaja Vlrabahu, of lion-like 
courage, and surrounded by a great force, to Pulatthinagara 
where after a sharp fight he shortly put the assembled troops to 
flight. Placing them around the pyre on which were laid the 
remains of the murdered generals, he had the recreant leaders 
of the troops, their hands bound fast to their backs, chained to a 
stake and burnt in the midst of the flames blazing up around 
them. The Ruler having (thus) executed there the ring-leaders of 
the rebels, freed the soil of Lanka everywhere from the briers (of 
the rebels). 

“The King did not lose sight of the aim he had set himself of 
fighting with the Cola (King), and in the forty-fifth year (of 
his reign) he marched with war-equipped troops to the port on 
the sea and stayed there some time awaiting his arrival. But as 
the Cola (King) did not appear, the King dismissed his envoys, 
returned to Pulatthinagara and resided there a considerable 
time. ’ ’ 

The tortuous policy of Kulottunga, however, failed 
completely. The V elaikkara rebellion was suppressed 



KULOTTUNQA I A.D. 1070-1120 


25 


and the mercenaries bound themselves to serve the king 
loyally thereafter and the chief Buddhist shrine of 
Polonnaruwa 07 was placed under their protection. 
Kulottunga apparently made his peace with Vijaya- 
bahu, for one of his daughters, Suriyavalliyar, married 
Virapperumal, a Singalese prince of the Pandyan party 
in Ceylon, and made a gift of a ‘perpetual’ lamp to an 
Isvara temple in the reign of Jayabahu I, the successor 
of Yi jayabahu. 68 


From the Song annals of China we learn that an 
embassy from Chulien (Cola) reached the Chinese 


Relations with 


court in the year 1077 and that the king 


China 


of Chulien at the time was called 


Ti-hua-kia-lo. It is possible that these syllables disguise 
the name of Deva Kulo(ttunga). Indeed Deva-lcala and 
Divakara, it has been said, 08:1 are the only possible 
restorations, and Deva-kula or -kulo is impossible. But 
considering that the name is that of the Cola king ruling 
in 1077 A.D., the suggestion that it is Kulottunga’s 
name that has been thus distorted does not seem far- 


fetched. This ‘embassy’ was clearly a trading venture 
and seems to have ended very profitably for the Tamils. 
For the seventy-two men who formed the embassy “were 
given 81,800 strings of copper cash, i.e., about as many 
dollars, in return for the articles of tribute compris- 
ing glassware, camphor, broeates (called Kimlhwa in 
the Chinese text), rhinoceros horns, ivory, incense, 


"600 of 1912; El. xvlii, pp. 330 ff. 

** Ceylon Journal of Science, G. II, 2, pp. 105 and 116. 
«s»By Pelliot and Coedes In letters to the present writer. 
K — i 



26 


THE COLAS 


rose-water, put chuck, asafoetida, borax, cloves, etc.” G8b 
Turning now to Kadaram, there is indeed a stray 
reference in the Kalingattupparani to Kulottunga’s 
destruction of Kadaram on the wide ocean, 68 ' and his 
inscriptions speak of costly tributes from foreign 
islands. But the references are vague and we should 
not lose sight of the literary convention by which a poet 
may attribute to one ruler all the achievements of his 
predecessors on the throne. That Kulottunga was in 
touch with the empire of Sri Yijaya becomes clear from 
other evidence, particularly the smaller Leyden grant. 
The suggestion has been made that Kulottunga spent 
part of the period 1063 to 1070 in Sri Yijaya restoring 
order and maintaining the Cola power in that quarter. 6811 

Two facts have been cited in support of this view : 
Kulottunga restored peace in the Eastern lands in his 
youth, like Visnu gently raising the Earth from the 
waters of the ocean; secondly the names of the high 
official who visited China as envoy from Sri Yijaya in 
1067 and of the Cola emperor who sent the embassy to 
China (noted above) ten years later are the same, 

Ti-hua-kia-lo — Devakala, probably a part of Deva 
Kulo(ttunga). Tempting as the suggestion looks, we 
cannot accept it without hesitation. It is very surprising 
that if Kulottunga had such a romantic career across 
the seas before taking possession of the Cola throne we 

tSh JRAS. 1896, p. 490 n.; Chau Jit-kua, p. 100 n. 6; ja. xi: 20, (1922) 
p. 20; BEFEO. xxiii, p. 470. 

e8c vi. v. 18. 

"“Journal of the Greater India Society , Vol. i, pp. 87-8. 



KULOTTUNGA i A.D. 1070-1120 


2iT 

should not get more specific information about it in the 
numerous records of the reign. One inscription 080 

indeed says that a beautiful stone was shown to 
Kulottunga by the king of Kambhoja as a curio ( kdtci ). 
When did he do so i Did Kulottunga visit Kambhoja, 
the Khmer kingdom 1 

„ Scholars have been puzzled by a statement in 

the Chinese annals (preserved in the 
and Kaijaram. pages of Ma Tuan-lin) that the Cola 

Kingdom was subject to Sri Vijaya in 
A.D. 1068-77. In recording an embassy from Pagan in 
1106, Ma Tuan-lin says in effect: “The Emperor at 
first gave order to receive them and treat them as they 

treated the envoys of Tchou-lien (Cola) ; but the 
President of the Council of Rites presented the follow- 
ing observations : * the Cola is subject to San-f o-ts ’i ; 
this is why in the years hi-ning (1068-1077), we were 
content to write to the King of this Kingdom on strong 
paper with an envelope of plain stuff. The King of 
Pou-kan (Pagan) on the contrary is sovereign of a 
great kingdom of the Fan ’ M68 From this interest- 

ing passage we gather that the ambassadors of 
San-f o-ts ’i (Sri "Vijaya) had sometime in 1068-1077 
claimed in the Chinese court that the Cola kingdom was 
subject to them and that they were entitled to a higher 
rank than the representatives of the Cola ruler, and 
that this order of priority was cited as a precedent in 
1106 to justify the ranking of Cola envoys below those 

••’El. v, p. 105. 

"BEFEO . xviii, 6, p. 8, cited by Coedes* 



Ss 


THE CO^AS 


from Pagan. To appraise these statements at their 
proper value, one must recall the difficulties that would 
most naturally be experienced by envoys from the 
Tamil country in making their position and that of their 
ruler properly understood in distant China. We may 
notice that much earlier than 1068, the embassies sent 
to China by Raj aril j a I and Rajendra I experienced 
similar difficulties and were ranked much below their 
proper place. 68 ® The gaucherie of the Tamil envoys, the 
ignorance of Chinese officialdom of the true state of 
polities in remote countries, and perhaps, the readiness 
of the ambassadors of Sri Vijaya to indulge in unjust 
misrepresentations relating to Cola must have combined 
to bring about the situation recorded by Ma Tuan-l in. 
There is not the slightest ground, however, to believe 
that either in 1068 or in 1106, the Cola Kingdom became 
the vassal of Sri Vijaya. All the other evidence on 
the relations between the two kingdoms is opposed to 
this assumption. 70 

Virarajendra, as we have seen, claims to have sent 
an expedition to Kadaram (Sri Vijaya) in 1068 A.D. 
and to have conquered that country on behalf of one of 
its rulers who sought his protection and to have esta- 
blished him on the throne. This seems not improbable, 
and might have resulted in a vague recognition of the 

t9 *Chau Ju-kua , pp. 96, 101. 

T0 Cf. Krora — Hindoe-J avaansche Geschiedcnis pp. 302-4. Vogel simply 
says that it is not clear what importance should be attached 
to the Chinese source quoted above — Bijdragen Deel 76 (1919), p. 637. 
Coedes (loo. cit .) is inclined to believe that as the Cola inscriptions exagge- 
rate the sway of the Coja over Sri Vijaya, so the latter, 4 in its turn pre- 
tends to exercise its sovereignty over the Colas/ Gerini is the only 
writer who accepts Ma Tuan-lin’s statement at its face value. Researches, 

p. 624 n. 1. 



JCULOTTUNOA I A.D. 1070-1120 


29 


suzerainty of the Co}a power by the new ruler. How- 
ever that may be, the king of Sri Vijaya sent an 
embassy to Kulottunga I about 1090 and requested him 
to issue a copper-plate grant containing the names of the 
villages granted by the Cola kings as pallic-candam to 
the two viharas built by the king of Kadaram at SojLa- 
kulavaUi-pattinam, evidently another name for Nega- 
patam'. In the smaller Leyden grant, 71 for it is by this 
name that Kulottunga : s grant made on this occasion is 
generally known, the two viharas are called Rajendra- 
solap-perumballi and Rajarajap-perumballi ; 7 ~ the 
latter having also the alternative name Sri Sailendra- 


Cudamanivarma- V iliara, 7 1 
• • / 


showing its identity with the 


vihdra mentioned in the Larger Leyden grant of the 


reign of Rajaraja I. The embassy from Kadaram com- 


prises two envoys ( dutas ) Rajavidyadhara Sri 


Samanta and Abhimanottunga Samanta, who petitioned 


the King ( vinnappam seyya ) for the issue of the grant, 
while he was seated on his throne Kalingarayan in the 
bathing hall ( timmahjam sdlai ) 74 inside the palace at 
Ayirattaji alias Ahavamallakula-Kalapuram. And the 
longer prasasti of Kulottunga ’s inscriptions mentions 
the fact that at the gate of his palace stood rows of 
elephants showering jewels sent as tribute from the 
island kingdoms of the wide ocean. 75 Another proof of 


,i ASSI. iv, p. 224. 

T »iMd. 11. 6-7. 

"i&M. 11. 39-40. 

T4 This phrase which occurs often in the inscriptions is noteworthy as 
implying that the king heard petitions while he was bathing. 74 of 1932, 
1. 39. gives the expression: viffin ulJdl ku\ikkumri^attu. To our notions 
it seems a strange mode of receiving a foreign embassy to hear them 

while you are bathing. See, however, p. 51 below for an abhi^ka 
manQapa. 

" SIL ill, p. 146, 



30 


*THE C5LAS 


the continued friendly relations between the two king- 
doms in this period comes from Sumatra. It is a 

fragmentary Tamil inscription dated 1010 Saka 
(A.D. 1088) from Loboe Toewa, and mentioning the 
name of a celebrated mercantile corporation of South 


India, the Tisaiyayirattu-Ainnurruvai 



a name which, 


from analogous forms in the Cola inscriptions of the 


period, is best understood as 4 ‘ the Five Hundred of the 
thousand (districts) in the (Four) quarters.” While 
there is little evidence of the political power of the 
Colas having extended to the islands of the Malay archi- 
pelago in this period, trade relations and culture con- 
tacts established in an earlier age seem to have been 
actively maintained in the reign of Kulottunga, and 
perhaps also under his successors, 'l 


In the North, Kulottunga left the administration 

of the Yengi kingdom in the hands of 
'Viceroys of Vijayaditya YII until his death. The 

relations between them, never very 
happy, seem to have continued strained even after 
. Kulottunga ’s accession to the Cola throne. There are 
Eastern Ganga inscriptions which show that the Ganga 

king RajarSja took up the cause of Vijayaditya YII 
with Kulottunga and secured for him a peaceful 
time towards the end of his life and career as 
ruler of Yengi. Whether, as seems probable, this 
intercession of Rajaraja took place after and in 
virtue of his marriage with Rajasundari, the 
daughter of Kulottunga, or whether his marriage 

t«IY>r a full discussion of this inscription, see my paper on 'A Tamil 
Merchant-Guild in Sumatra’ ( Tijdschrift voor Indische TaabyLandr.cn 
Volkenkunde , 1932, p. 314). 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


31 


with the Cola princess and Kulottunga ’s continued 
recognition of Vijayaditya as Viceroy were alike the 
terms of an alliance between Rajaraja and Kulottunga 
following a short campaign, it is not easy to decide. 77 
However that may be, after the death of Vijayaditya 
at the end of fifteen years of his reign in Vengi, 
Kulottunga appointed his son, Rajaraja Mummadi 

Coda, as Viceroy, and he was anointed as Viceroy most 
probably on July 27th A.D. 1076. 78 He preferred living 
under the same roof as his parents to the enjoyment of a 
distant Viceroyalty, and at the end of a year, he relin- 
quished his office. His younger brother, Vira Coda, 
was then chosen Viceroy and continued to rule in Vengi 
for a period of six years from the date of his coronation 

in Saka 1001 (A.D. 1078-9). 79 From 1084 to 1089 another 
son of Kulottunga, by name Rajaraja Codaganga, was 
the Viceroy. This is clear from the Telci plates of 
this ruler, dated in the seventeenth year, obviously of 
Kulottunga. The Pitlnlpuram plates of Vira Coda 80 
also state that Vira Coda was recalled from Vengi by 
his father who desired ‘to see the growing beauty of 
his youthful countenance', and that he was sent again 
to the North at the end of five years though his father’s 
‘eyes had not attained satiety’. But these plates do not 
state what happened at Vengi during the five years that 
Vira Coda spent with his father, and the Cellur plates 
of Vira Coda make no reference either to the break in* 


’’See ante , Ch. xii. 

7 9 EL v. No. 10; vi. No. 35, ARE. 1922, II 6. 
’•Pith&puram plates (EL, v. No. 10), v. 21. 



32 


THE COt AS 


his Yiceroyalty or to Codaganga. Hultzsch says 81 that 
this total silence of the Cellur plates and the omission of 
Codaganga ’s name from the Pithapuram plates may 
lead us to suppose that Codaganga had discredited him- 
self with his father and had been on bad terms with his 

brother. The fact that Codaganga, though apparently 
the eldest son of Kulottunga, 82 was not appointed 
Viceroy until a comparatively late stage lends colour to 
the supposition. In any event, Vira Coda ’s second term 
as Viceroy of Vengi seems to have commenced about 
A.D. 1088-89 and lasted till at least 1092-93. As 
Viceroy of V engi, Vira Coda was assisted by a V elananti 
Prince Vedura II, a nephew of Gonka I, in a battle 
against an unnamed Pandya King, and Vira C5da 
conferred on Vedura the doab country, Sindhu- 
yugmantaradesa, identified by Hultzsch, with the land 
between the Krsna and Godavari. 83 Soon after, 
Kulottunga likewise favoured other princes of the same 
line. Vira Coda was succeeded by Vikrama Cola who 
apparently ruled in Vengi till he was chosen heir- 
apparent to the Cola throne in A.D. 1118. 

We hear little of happenings in Vengi and further 

North till we reach the period of 

W Nortl? the Vikrama Cola’s office. In his inscrip- 
tions dated after his accession to the 
Cola throne, there occurs a brief description of his 
Viceroyalty of Vengi. It is this : 

•'EI. vi. p. 335. 

Plates, v. 21* 

••EI. iv, p. 36. 



KULOTTUNGA 1 A.D. 1070-1120 


33 


“While yet a child , 84 (he) bore the cruel weapons (of war), 
so that at Kujam the Telinga Vlman ascended the mountains as 
refuge, and so that hot fire consumed the land of Kalinga; he 

thus stayed joyfully in the Vengai-Mandalam and was pleased to 
subdue the Northern region. ’ ’ 

The inscriptions of Kulottunga himself contain 
accounts of two Cola invasions of Kalingam, one of 
which is, no doubt, the subject of the celebrated Parani 
of Jayangondar . 80 The first invasion of Kalingam is 
mentioned in inscriptions of the twenty-sixth year , 80 
and from the brevity with which the subjection of 
Kalingam is mentioned on this occasion, we may con- 
clude that this was the war in which Yikrama Cola 

• 

distinguished himself as a young man. The second and 
later invasion of Kalinga is mentioned in the 
inscriptions of the forty-second and subsequent years ; 87 
this is the invasion which gave the occasion for the 
Parani , and apparently Vikrama Cola had no pail in 
it. 


The first Kalinga "War seems to have been 

brought about by Kalinga aggression 
F war. Kalinsa against Yengi, and to have resulted in 

the annexation of the southern part of 
the Kalinga Country to the Cola Empire. The chief 

* 4 Aimt)a#aippanivani simply means childhood, the period when 
amulets shaped like the five weapons of Vi$pu are worn. See Tamil 
Lexicon s.v. Aimba4aittfili. (Cf. Kalingattupparayi, x 8), This is of 
course an exaggeration of the youthful age of Vikrama C5Ja when he began 
his career as Viceroy. Contra Hultzsch 871. iii, p. 184 and n. 7. 

8 8 See ante, i. pp. 19-20. 

"817. iii, 72 and 304 of 1907; also 463 of 1911 (year 27). I see 
no justification for Sewell mentioning this event under AD. 1090. 
HI 87. p. 89. 

• T 608 of 1904, 44 of 1891. 

K— 5 



34 


THE CO^AS 


of Kolanu, modern Ellore near the Colair lake, was 
evidently in league with the ruler of Kalinga, and 

Vikrama Cola had to fight on two fronts simultaneously. 
A vassal of the Cola Emperor from the distant South, 
the Pandya King Parantaka took part in this war and 
assisted Vikrama Cola. The inscriptions of Parantaka 
Pandya , 88 like those of Vikrama Cola, state that Kulam 
of the Telunga Bhima was captured and that. Southern 
Kalingam was subdued. Bhima was a very common 
name in the family; it was borne by many rulers 
of Kolanu, Saronathas, from the time of Rajaraja I 
Co]a to at least the middle of the twelfth century A.D . 89 
No details are forthcoming of this first war against 
Kalinga. The campaign seems to have been undertaken 
for the suppression of local revolts rather than for 
the conquest of fresh territory. ^Southern Kalinga was 

apparently the territory between the Godavari and the 
Mahendra mountain , 90 and this territory was already 
part of the Vengi province some years before the war of 
Vikrama Cola . 91 Possibly, the subordinate nilers 
whose territories were included in the Viceroyalty of 
Vengi conspired together and rose in rebellion when the 
young prince Vikrama Cola was appointed to the charge 
of the province. The revolt was unsuccessful, and the 
entire province was restored to subjection. A Tamil 
inscription of Kulottunga at Simhacalam dated Saka 

••TAB. 1, p. 22, 1. 8. 

••ARB. 1917, II 27. 

•"Cunningham, Ancient Geography, p. 591. 

* l, yeki plates 1, 83 — Mapnefi-MahCndro-madhya-vartino. El. vi, p. 335. 



KUL6TTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 $5 

1021 (A.D. 1098-9), 02 and several others at Draksarama 
and other places attest the successful restoration of 
authority. 

The later invasion which took place about A.D. 1110 
is described in some detail in the inscriptions of 

Kulottunga and at greater length in the 
-Second war. Kalingattupparani. According to the 

inscriptions, 03 the Cola army crossed 
the Vengi territory, destroyed the elephant corps that 
was set by the enemy to oppose its march, spread fire 
across the enemy country of Kalingam, killed in the 
fight many powerful leaders of the Kalinga army whose 
heads rolled on the battle-field, pecked by kites, and 
in the end subdued the Seven Kalingas. The account 
in the Kalingattupparani may be summarised as 

follows. 04 When the emperor sat in darbar in 
his palace at Kanci, the tiru-mandira-olai announced to 
his master the arrival of subject kings who had brought 
the annual tribute, and were waiting outside. The 
vassals were then permitted to enter and exhibit their 
presents. At the end, the emperor enquired if there 

were any who had defaulted, and was informed that the 

« „ 

» 2 363 of 1899. Venkayya postulates a Kalinga invasion of Vengi 
which reached Elfore. “The way in which Vikrama Cola’s conquest is 
described may (at least provisionally) be taken to mean that he probably 
repelled a Kalinga invasion into Vengi. The invading army apparently 
advanced as far south as Ellore or some place near it, where the decisive 
battle seems to have taken place.” ARE. 1905, II 18. However, he adds: 
“The earlier invasion which took place in or before A.D. 1095-96 was 
perhaps against South Kalinga, in which Cdtfaganga, who was lord of 
Tri-Kalinga, had apparently no direct intorest”. (ibid). 

• # 44 of 1891, (SIR iv, 445). The pra4a$ti records the war as a 
personal achievement of KulCttunga. But the Paray,i is clear that the 
expedition was led, not by the king, but his generalissimo, Karup&kara 
Toptfaimfin 

• 4 IA. xlx, p. 338. 



36 


THE CO^AS 


Icing of North Kalinga had done so twice. The 
emperor forthwith issued the command that an expedi- 
tion should be sent against Kalinga to storm the hill- 
forts of Kalinga and bring its ruler as a prisoner of 
war. The valiant Pallava chieftain, Karunakara 
Tondaiman, lord of Vandai, offered to carry out the 
emperor’s orders and was accepted. The expeditionary 
force led by Karunakara soon started from Kanci. It 
crossed the Palar and the Ponmukhari rivers and 
reached the Pennar ; among the other streams crossed 
by it before reaching Kalingam were the Mannaru, the 
Krsna, the Godavari, the Pampa and the Gotami. The 
Cola army began to spread destruction as it entered 
Kalinga, and the suffering inhabitants fled to their king 
and reported to him what they had seen and suffered. 
Anantavarman, who had known no defeat before, made 
light of the whole business, as it was only Kulottunga’s 
army, not the emperor himself, that was advancing; 
one of' his ministers, Engaraya, remonstrated with him 
and spoke of the great achievements that already stood 
to the credit of the Cola army. Nothing daunted, 
Anantavarman prepared for the fight. The battle that 
ensued ended in a complete victory for the Cola forces 

and Anantavarman sought his safety in flight. After a 
futile search for him, the victorious Co]a army returned 
home with vast booty. 

The invasion of North Kalinga, called the 
Seven Kalingas, and the part of KarunSkara in 
it are thus well attested by the inscriptions and 



kULdTTUNGA I A.i>. 1070-1120 


$1 


the poem. Only the poem gives the immediate 
cause of the war, namely the default on the 
part of the Kalinga king in the payment of the 
annual tribute. This king, Anantavarman Codaganga, 
was the grandson of Kulottunga himself by his daughter 
Rajasundari. Dynastic connections, however, seldom 
availed to stop the course of political ambition, and it 
would seem that Kulottunga was the aggressor on this 
occasion. It is hard to believe that throughout the long 
and, apparently, prosperous reign of Anantavarman, 
the kingdom of Kalinga was a vassal state remitting a 
fixed tribute annually to the Cola court. It may be 
noted that an inscription from Draksarama" 3 dated 

iSaka 1003 in the reign of V isnuvardhana (Kulottunga ?) 
records a gift by the wife of a Pradhani of the 
Tri-Kalingadhipati Rajarajadeva. If this is a refe- 
rence to the father of Anantavarman, it would follow 
that Kalinga was such a vassal state at least for 
a time. The real cause of the war, however, is obscure ; 
and the darbar held by Kulottunga at Kancipuram in 
the historic palace of the Colas in that city 00 and the 
report of Anantavarman ’s default made to the emperor 
by his secretary, may be, not history, but only a literary 
setting for the grand military enterprise described in 
the poem. It is clear that the expedition of 
Karupakara led to no permanent results. There is no 

*■181 of 1893; ARE. gives S. 1002. 

••The palace and the particular hall in it where Kuldttunga he'd his 
darbar are mentioned so early as the reign of Uttama C6}a— Museum Plates 

1. 13. (SII. iii, p. 269)* 



38 


THE COliAS 


evidence of a Cola occupation of Northern Kalinga. 07 
It may also be noted that a Kota chief Bhima is said, 
in an inscription of A.D. 1108, 98 to have assisted the 
Cola in subduing the Kalinga country. This may be a 
reference to his part in the first or the second war. 


The Empire of Kulottunga still retained its greatest 

extent in his forty-fifth regnal year or 

Extent of Empire, thereabouts. Barring the loss of Ceylon, 

the troubles and risings in the first 
years of the reign had not resulted in any serious 
loss of territory. The boundary between the Western 
Calukya and Cola dominions was what it had always 

0T Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar : Karundkarat-tonQaimdn, in his 

Kalingattupparatyi-ydrdycci , has a good discussion of this expedition. From 
H« 660-2 of the V ikr^ama&olan-uld, Venkayya infers that Vikrama COla 
took part in th© expedition led by Karupakara against North Kalinga, 
(ARE. 1905 II, 18). Jayangopdar makes no mention of Vikrama C6}a 
anywhere in his narrative, and his silence would be unaccountable even 
on the assumption that Vikrama C6}a did not start from Kaftcl. but joined 
the expeditionary force somewhere in the Vengi province. On the other 
hand, there are other literary references to Vikrama’s war against North 
Kalinga, besides the one noted by Venkayya. These, which we shall 
discuss later, seem to imply that there was another expedition in Vikrama’s 
reign, and the lines of the uld cited above must be taken to refer to it. 

Venkayya (ibid) also argues that (i) Cocjaganga became strong and 
powerful only during the latter part of his reign, and (ii) Kulbttunga’s 
invasion against North Kalinga was undertaken to help him against 
“some rebellious feudatory, whose territories were denoted by the term 
’Seven KalingasV’ For (i) he depends on a comparison of the two 
Vizagapatam plates of A.D. 1087 (1081 ?) and 1118-19 (I A. xviii) ; but a 
perusal of the third set of plates dated A.D. 1135 shows that the points 
made by Venkayya cannot be true; he is dealing with differences due, not 
to a change in the political power or status of Codaganga, but to the two 
different types of praAastis employed in the two sets of plates. No. (ii) 
above is contradicted by the Kalingattupparaqi which says clearly that 
Anantavarman himself, and not any vassal of his, was the Lord of Seven 
Kalingas, and that Karupakara's expedition was directed against 
Anantavarman himself. Anantavarman’s boast about Utkala in the East 
and Vengi in the West may be no more than a reference to his father 
R&jaraja’s achievements of which he enjoyed the results. 

•*567 of 1925. 



KULOTTUNGA X A.D. 1070-1120 


39 


been, a shifting frontier in the neighbourhood of the 
Tungabhadra, whose exact position at any particular 
time is to be determined by the provenance of contem- 
porary inscriptions. The presence of Kulottunga ’s 
inscriptions in Nandalur (Cuddapah) called Kulot- 
tunga-sola-Caturvedimangalam, and in Tripuran- 
takam (Karnul ), 09 as also in the Mysore country up to 

the forty-fifth year 100 proves that the rule of Kulottunga 
was successfully maintained in these quarters. The 
hold over Vengi was quite firm and had rendered 
possible a successful invasion of the territory of its 
northern neighbour, Kalinga. 

The Co]a Empire under Kulottunga maintained 

extensive foreign connections in India 
Tions! c ° nnec and outside. The relations with the 

Empire of Sri Vijaya have been noticed 
above. An incomplete Gahadval prasasti engraved on 
the walls of the temple of Gangaikonda-sola-puram 
shows that Cola diplomacy in this period embraced the 
Northern India States within the range of its orbit. 
This prasasti which begins Akiinthotkantha must 
belong to Madanapala or his son Govindaeandra of 
Kanauj. The inscription 101 opens by citing the forty- 
first regnal year of Kulottunga, and then gives a good 
part of the Gahadval prasasti, but stops without giving 
the name of the actual ruler who makes the record or 
detailing the gift which furnishes the occasion for it. 

••COO of 1907; 265 of 1905. 

1,0 494 of 1911=15C. Iv, Kr. 34. 

”*29 of 1908. ARE. 1908, IT, 68-60. 



40 


THE COfcAS 


This prasasti in the distant Cola capital is perhaps 
evidence of some dynastic connection, otherwise un- 
known, between these two dynasties. And the increased 

emphasis on sun-worship in the Cola country in 

» 

Kulottunga ’s reign may be due to the close association 
with the Gahadvals who were great worshippers of the 
sun. 102 It may also be noted in passing that a certain 
Vagisvara-raksita of the Coda country is mentioned in 
a copper-plate grant of Govindacandra (A.D. 1129) as 
a disciple of Sakyaraksita of Orissa. 103 We have 
already noticed the inscription from Cidambaram 
which is dated 13th March A.D. 1114, and mentions 
the facts that Rajendra received a peculiar stone 
as a present from the king of Kambhoja, and that 
he caused this stone to be inserted into the wall 
of a hall in front of the shrine at Cidambaram. 104 One 
wonders if this is a relic of the friendly connections 
maintained by Kulottunga with the powerful Khmer 
empire across the seas, on the sea-route to China. 

Kyanzittha (1084 — 1112 A.D.), the ruler of Pagan, is 
said in Burmese accounts, to have met a Cdla prince, 
converted him to Buddhism and married his daughter ; 
Tamil epigraphy and literature offer no help in settling 
the identity of the Cola prince or the truth of the 

Burmese story . 105 

‘•‘ARE. 1927 11, 19-21. 

‘••EI. xi, No. 3, 11. 19 It. 

‘•<119 of 1888, El. v, p. 105, ante p. 27. 

‘••ARB. 1918, paragraphs 41-2; 1919 paragraph 39; ARE. 1919, 1, 9. 
Ep. Bir. 1, pp. 164*5. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


41 


Towards the end of his reign, Kulottunga lost the 

province of Gangavadi to the rising 
Ganga ' power of the Hoysalas. Though the 
Hoysalas are mentioned as early as 
1006 A.D. in the reign of Rajaraja I, 106 Iloysala history 
really commences with Nrpa-Kama (c. A.D. 1022 — 
1040), the father of Vinayaditya and patron of Eeama 
or Eciga, the father of Gangaraja, the Hoysala general 


who captured Tajakkad from the Colas in 1116 A.D. 
For many years the Hoysalas acknowledged the 
supremacy of the Western Calukyas, the enemies of the 
Co]a power, and we have seen that Ereyanga, the son of 
Vinayaditya, assisted Vikramaditya VI in his wars 
against Kulottunga after the accession of the latter to 
the Co] a throne. The real extent of Hoysala rule in the 
early stages of their rise is not easy to determine. The 
boundaries of the Hoysala territory recorded in an 
inscription of Ballala I 107 and the provenance of the 
Hoysala and Cola inscriptions of the period suggest the 
conclusion that Hoysala rule was confined to the Hassan 


and Kadur districts and parts of Nagamangala taluq. 
And it is also clear that Vinayaditya was a feudatory of 
the contemporary Calukyas throughout the long period 
of his rule c. 1047-1100 A.D., as is seen from the part 
of the Hoysala in the war between Vikramaditya and 
Kulottunga. 


‘"TN. 44. For Hoysala history In general, see BO. 1, ii, pp. 490 ff. 
and Rice, Mysore and Ooorg, pp. 94 ft. 

'"EC. x. Bl. 199. 

K— 6 



42 


THE CO^iAS 


It was under Bittiga Visnu-Vardhana (1100 — 
1152) 108 that the Hoysalas attained a really prominent 
position. The title ‘ Talakadu-gonda ’ is first applied 
to him in an inscription dated A.D. 1116, and in the 
same year he is described as ruling in Tajakadu and 
Kolala (Kolar), over the whole of Gangavadi as far as 
Kongu. 3 00 The Belur copper-plate grant (A.D. 1117) 
records that ‘he first acquired the wealth of the Hoysala 
rule or dominions; that, pushing on so far as to take 
Talakad, he was the first to promote the race of Yadu 
to the rule of the dominions of the Gangas ; and that he 
burnt the capital city of the Gangas’. It is thus clear 
that Visnu-Vardhana inherited some limited territory 
round about Belur and that, in the first five or six years 
of his rule, he greatly extended his sway by the 
conquest of the Gangavadi province. 

This province was under the Colas at the time and 
regularly administered as a division of the Cola Empire. 
It was conquered for the Hoysala by his Dandaniiyaka 
Ganga-raja. The ancient line of Adigaimans of 
Tagadur (Dharmapuri) in the Kongu country acted as 
the representatives of Cola power in this region. The 
Hoysala inscriptions begin their narrative of Ganga- 
raja ’s conquest of the Cola province with the statement 
that the Cola’s samanta Adiyama was stationed like the 
bolt of a door above the ghats, in the camp at Talakadu, 
on the frontier of the Gangavadi-nadu, that Adiyama 
refused to surrender to Ganga-raja, the Nadu which the 

“•Rice gave the period 1111—1141 to Vlepu-Vardhana. A closer 
study of his records by A. Krishnamurti supports the dates adopted in 
the text. 

10 “Rice op. cit., p. 93 and n. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


43 


Cola had given and told Ganga-raja to fight and take 
it . 110 The battle which followed and practically decided 
the fate of the Gangavadi province must have been 
fought not far from Talakad. Besides Adiyama, two 
other chiefs, Damodara and Narasimha Varma, and 
other unnamed S&mantas fought on the Cola side. The 
victory of Ganga-raja against the Tigulas (Tamils) 
was complete, and he followed up his success by expell- 
ing the Tamils from Gangavadi. “Having driven out 
the Tigulas, he restored Gangavadi to VIra Ganga 
( Y isnu- V ardhanu ) ; was not Ganga-raja a hundred-fold 
more fortunate than the former Raja 111 of the Gangas?” 

Other inscriptions of Visnu-Vardhana give an 
exaggerated and doubtless partly fictitious account of 
his achievements, and it is by no means easy to sift the 
evidence . 113 To confine our attention to statements relat- 
ing to his conquests from the Colas, it is probable that 

Talakad (Rajarajapura), Nilagiri, Nangili, Kolala, 
Tereyur and Koyattur 113 became subject to him as a 
result of Ganga-raja’s campaigns, and the same may be 
true of a part, though not the whole of Kongu ; but the 
claim that Kanci obeyed his commands and that he 
squeezed, as if he held it in his hand, the southern 
Madhurapura is not less incredible than his 
wars against Cakrakuta or Lata. On the other hand 
there is some evidence of a raid into the heart of the Co}a 
country by the Hoysala forces in this period, evidence 

119 EO. ii. 240, (90). 

’"C&muQga-Raja according to R. A. Narasfmhachar, EC. ii. Intr. p. 52. 

BO. I* ii, 49M3. 

118 This place is in the Chittoor District; it is not Coimbatore as Fleet 
{ibid, p. 496) thought. €f. Rangachari i, p. 600. 



THE CO^AS 


which gives some colour to V i snu- Vardhana ’s claim that 
he marched up to Ramesvaram. An inscription of 
Parakrama Pandya 114 states that several years before 
the date of the record, certain Pallis of the temple at 
Aduturai rescued some of its images which were being 

carried to Halebld, and were rewarded by the grant of 
certain privileges which were renewed by Parakrama 
Pandya. It is probable that the unsuccessful attempt 
to remove images from Aduturai to Halebld was made 
in V isnu- Vardhana ’s reign, and if this view is correct, 
the exaggerated statements of Y isnu- V ardiiana ’s con- 
quests in his inscriptions must have some basis in fact. 
In any event, the absence from the Mysore country of 
Kulottunga ’s inscriptions after his forty-fifth year 
(1115) is sufficient proof of the transfer of (langavadi 
from the Colas to the Hoysalas as a result of the war; 
but even here the re-appearance of Vikrama Cola’s 
inscriptions in the Kolar region and elsewhere shows 
that the Colas managed either to retain or recover part 
of the province. 

Towards the end of his reign, Kulottunga lost much 

of his territory in another direction, 
'rouble in vengi. The northern half of the V engi kingdom, 

if not the whole of it, seems to have 
slipped from his hands and gone over to the empire of 

the Western Calukya ruler Yikiamaditya YI. That 

* * k '■* , ^ 

the latter was bent on making reprisals for his failure 
in the first war against Kulottunga and that he kept up 
his enmity against Kulottunga unabated is clear from 

>i<35 of 1913; ARE. 1913 II. 46-7. PK. p. 129. 



KULOTTUNGA. I A.D. 1070-1120 


45 


the records of his reign. In A.D. 1084, Vikramaditya 
complains that the ‘hostile Cola does not come to the 


battle-field’. 115 In fact, Vikramadity a ’s plan was to 
take advantage of Kulottunga ’s pre-occupation with 
affairs in the youth and create a diversion in the North 


by proceeding against the kingdom of Yengi and its 
vassal states. From the history of the Viceroyalty of 
Yengi, we see that the efforts of the Western Calukya 


ruler did not apparently have any tangible result up to 
the accession of Vikrama Cola to that office about 
A.D. 1092-3. yoon after came the war against the chief 
of Kulam and against youth Kalinga ; these 1 evolts were 
perhaps, at least in part, due to the intrigues of Vikra- 
maditya. And so too might have been the defiance of 
the E. Ganga ruler Anantavarman Codagangu which 
necessitated the second Kalinga war, the war against 
N orth Kalinga. It was not, however, till Y ikrama Cola 
was summoned to the south in A.D. 1118, by the aged 
Kulottunga to become the heir-apparent to the Cola 
throne, that the troubles that had long been gathering 


against Kulottunga in the north came to a head. The 
Pithapuram inscription of Mallapadeva, 116 dated 

6. 1124 (A.D. 1202), makes the definite statement that 
after the marvellous ( aptirvapuruso) Kulottunga had 
ruled for fifty years the five Dravidas together with the 
Andhra country, when Vikrama Coja went to rule the 
Co}a country, the land of Y engi at once fell into a state 


1 1 ‘EL xv, pp. 101. 103. 

1 1 >£1. lv, No. 33, w. 22-4. 



46 


THE CO^AS 


of anarchy ( \ engi- bhiunir -nuyaka - r alula jdta). 117 
This statement throws much welcome light on the con- 
temporary inscriptions of the Andhra country relating 
to the close of Kulottuuga’s reign and the period of 
Vikrama Cola’s rule as Cola king. 


Kulottunga’s inscriptions are found in Diaksa- 
rama in a continuous series up to his forty-ninth year, 
A.D. 1118-19. 118 On the other hand, there are no 
inscriptions of Vikrama Cola in the Northern Circars 
dated earlier than his ninth year (A.D. 1127 ) , and even 
then they form a very limited number and are confined 
to the southern parts of the Vengi kingdom in the 
modern Guntur District. 110 Vikramaditya ’s inscrip- 
tions are found in considerable numbers in Draksarama 
and are dated in the years of the Calukya- Vikrama era 
which started from the commencement of his reign. 
The largest number of these inscriptions bear dates 
froth 45 to 48, but earlier and later dates are not 

,l ’Krishna Sastri says: “The later Eastern Calukya copper-plates 
excepting those of Cellur, mention the fact that the Vengi country became 
devoid of a ruler subsequent to Vikrama Cola’s departure to the south, and 
Dr. Hultzsch surmised that this statement only suggested that the king's 
absence resulted in political troubles brought about by the growing 
influence of the Velanapdu chiefs and the ambitious invasion of the 
Western Cajukya king Vikramaditya VI. The political troubles could 
not, however, have been of a very serious nature, for wc find that the 
C&|ukya-C6)a kings continued to assert their sovereignty, though perhaps 
in a lesser and more limited degree. A large number of inscriptions dated 
In their reigns mention the Velanapdu subordinates, Gonka and his son 
Ilajendra.” ARb\ 1917, II, 25. By the Cellflr plates, Krishna Sastri 

obviously means the plates of Kulottunga II dated £. 1056 for 1065 as 

Kielhorn rightly points out. 1A. xiv. p. 56. iSL vii — Appendix — Kielhorn’s 
List No. 574. 1 am unable to discover what the other copper-plates are 

which Sastri had in mind. Mallapadeva’s inscription is a stone record. 
I think that in his impressionistic estimates of the political situation in 
this period in Vengi, K. Sastri has greatly underrated the effects of 
Vikramfiditya’s policy. 

”*194, 341, 344 of 1893. 

**•153 of 1897; 163 of 1897. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


47 


unknown either in Draksarama or elsewhere in the 
Telugu country. 120 Many among these records are 
engraved by the Telugu feudatories of Vikramaditya 
who acknowledge their subordinate position either 
openly or implicitly, by naming their suzerain lord or by 
simply dating their records in the Cajukya-Vikrama 
era. It has to be remembered, however, that in some 
instances the use of the era may have been no 
more than the continuance of a habit even after the 
reason for it had disappeared. That Vikramaditya 's 
rule did extend in this period over practically the whole 
of the Telugu country becomes clear from the 
provenance of his inscriptions. In S. 1039 (December, 
A.D. 1117), the Kakatlya chief Prola of Anumakonda 
acknowledges the supremacy of the Western Calukya 
ruler and records that the Anumakonda territory was 
conferred on his father Beta sometime before by the 
same sovereign. 121 About a year later, in December 
A.D. 1118, Anantapalayya, the dandanmjalxa of Vikra- 
maditya was, according to an inscription from 
Kommuru in the Guntur district, ruling over Vengi 
14,000. 122 And about. A.D. 1120, Anantapala’s wife 
made a gift to the celebrated shrine of Bhimesvara in 
Draksarama. 123 Velananti Rajendra in the same year, 
and Mayilama, the wife of a Telugu Coda chief, in the 
year after that, also made gifts in Draksarama recorded 

1,0 396 of 1893 bears the exceptionally early date 5, but does not contain 
any Cftjukya titles or the name of Vikramaditya. 

IM 106 of 1902; EL lx, p. 256. 

***819 of 1922. 

”*330 of 1893. 



48 


THE CO^AS 


in inscriptions dated in the Cahikva-Vikrama era.' 2 * 
Another Western Calukya commander, a nephew of 
Anantapjlla, was ruling Kondapalli in tlie Krishna 
District, in A.D. 1127. 125 The inscriptions from Drakxfi- 
rama bear dates in the Ciilukva-Vikrama era up to 57, 
A.D. 1132-3. Towards the close of this period, about 
►S. 1053 (A.D. 1131) a certain Nambiraja, son of Alalia, 
ruled in apparent independence, over the Satsahasra 
country to the south of the Krsna river and styled 
himself Lord of Kollipaka. 120 The Calukya-Coja 
power in Vengi was imdoubtedly eclipsed by that of the 
Western Calukya ruler Vikramaditya from A.D. 1118, 
and the Colas wei’e unable to regain even jiart of the 
territory so lost until after the deatli of Vikramaditya 
in A.D. 1126. Towards the dose of Kulottunga ’s reign, 
therefore, the extent of the Coki empire had become 


much less than what it was at his accession. To the loss 
of Ceylon at the commencement of the reign was now 
added that of Gangavadi and Vengi, and the Cola 
empire became a more or less purely Tamil power for 
the time being. In the prolonged duel between 
Vikramaditya and Kulottunga, the former had the 
satisfaction, though belated, of carrying to a successful 
end his policy of breaking the union of the Vengi and 
Cola thrones, and Kulottunga had to acquiesce in the 
result which he had so long withstood but could no 
longer avert. The latest known inscription of 


”‘335, 345 of 1893. 

”'258 of 1905; El. ix. p. 261. 


”•266 of 1893. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


49 


Kulottunga mentions his fifty-second year, 127 showing 
that he lived up to A.D. 1122. 


Kulottunga had various other names and titles. 

The name Rajendra found mostly 
Titles. in the early records of the reign before 

the fifth year, sometimes makes its 
appearance in those of a later dat e. 128 A Rajakesari by 
his place in Co]a succession, the Parakesari title occurs 
in his inscriptions sometimes by mistake. 12 " He is 
called Tribhuvana-cakravartin as early as the fifth year 
of his reign, 1 ' 10 though this title is not systematically 
repeated as in the records of his successors. His 
inscriptions from the Telugu country give him, besides 
the usual Eastern Calukya Sarvalokasrava and Yisnu- 
vardhana, the titles, 121 Parfmtaka, Permanadigalu, 
V ikrama-Cd]a, Kulasekhara-Pandya-Kulantaka. The 
Kal hi gat t uppara ti i calls him Yivudarajabliayankara, 
Akalanka, Abhaya and Jayadhara. 112 The name 
Abhaya occurs also in an inscription from Suclndram 
dated in the thirty-second regnal year, 1 ' 12 while 
Jayadhara is found in inscriptions from Tiruvorriyur, 
Pennftdam and Cidambaram. 131 T'irunl ri'uc-( Vila seems 


127. 

■”376 of 1908; 3 Of 1909; 35 of 1929. 

**•268 of 1901; 425 of 1902. 

’*“197 of 1919. Contra ttIJ. iii, p. 131. 

x9i EI. vi, pp. 220 ff. He is called Saptama Vi snu- vardhana though by 
no modern reckoning does he seem to be the seventh of the many Visnu- 
vardhanas in the line. 

,,2 Kanakasabhai (I A. xix, p. 337), and after him, Hultzsch (SII. iii, 
p. 130), think that KarikSla is also among these titles. I doubt this. For 
Akalanka see Parani y xiii, 89. 

i9t TA8. iv, p. 130. 

**U09 of 1892; 121 of 1912; 271 of 1029; 119 of 1S88. 

K— 7 



50 


THE CO^AS 


to have been another surname of the king, as 
a devaddna village granted to a new temple at Trisulam 
is called Tirunlrruc-Cola-nallur in an inscription of the 

thirty-ninth year . 135 The name Sungandavirtta-sola- 
nallur occurs in an inscription of the twenty-eighth 
year , 130 and another record dated four years later gives 
the king the title: ‘ ‘ Sungari - davirttu iru-nikki 
ulaganda,” meaning ‘ who abolished the tolls and ruled 
the world after dispelling darkness’. Though there are 
many literary references to the abolition of tolls by the 
king , 137 none of them is calculated to throw any light on 
the exact nature and scope of the reform. The term 
Sunga/m is explained by Parimelalagar to mean the tax 
(irai) on commodities carried in ships and carts , 138 
and this explanation would include not only what we 
now call ‘ toll s ’, but ‘ customs ’ as well. Though the exact 
date of Parimelalagar cannot be determined with cer- 
tainty, his explanation of Sungam may be accepted as 
applicable to the time of Kulottunga; one might even 
suggest that the annotator had Kulottunga ’s reform in 
his mind when he wrote his gloss on the verse in the 
Tiruk-kural. However that may be, we have no means 
of deciding whether Kulottunga did away with the tax 
on trade in one part only of his dominions or over the 
whole, and whether the abolition was permanent or only 
temporary and confined to a period following some occa- 
sion he wanted to celebrate by a boon to his subjects. 
On any of these alternatives, he would be entitled to the 

“•812 of 1901. 

“•374 of 1908. 

l#T See Takkay&gapparay,i, ed. Swaminatha Aiyar, p, 247, v. 775 and n. 

1 ••Comment on Kuxal 756. 



kUL^TTUNGA I A.fa. 1070-1120 


51 


epithet ‘ &ungandavirlla’ , but it is inconceivable that he 
meant to deprive the state permanently of a 
traditional and very profitable source of revenue. An 
inscription of A.D. 1194, 139 however, still refers to the 
Coja-nachi as the country where no Sungam was 
collected. Perhaps the exemption was permanent, but 
confined only to the Cola country proper. If this was 
so, the imperialism of the Colas did not lack an economic 
side to it ; it was not the purely military ideal of the 
vijiglsu of the Ar thasastras. It is curious how little the 
numberless inscriptions, which record a vast amount of 
detail on taxes and tax exemptions, assist us in obtaining 
a clear view of the prevailing tax-system or of the 
changes, if any, in taxation policy. That a land survey 
was undertaken in the sixteenth and fortieth years of 
Kulottunga’s reign is mentioned in the inscriptions of 
his successors and confirmed by an inscription of liis 
forty-eighth year mentioning the name of one of the 
survey officers. 140 

Kulottunga’s capital was Gangapuri or Gangai- 

konda-sola-puram. 1 1 1 The city next in 

Capital. . , . 

importance was Kaneipuram where 
there was a royal palace with an abhiseka mandapa 
whence the king issued several important grants. 14 * 
Other places the presence of royal palaces in which finds 
specific mention in the inscriptions of the reign 

**®288 of 1907 — &imgamilldc-c6land$u SOrrumalai kan$aru\i. 

l4O 440 of 1912; 132 of 1930. Also 87 of 1900 mentioning &rl-pddak6L 
ARE. 1900, paragraph 25. 

141 Kalingattupparapi , xiif, 61; V t k ramd n ka-dtva~cari to, vl % 21. 
iii, 73; MAR. 1917, pp. 42-4. 



THE CO^AS 


0 2 


are: Ayirattali, 143 Tirumaluvadi, 144 Mudikonda-sola- 
purain, 140 and Vikramasolapuram. 110 

The copper-plate grants state that Kulottunga 
Family. married Madliurantaki, the daughter of 

Rajendradeva of the Selar race, doubt- 
less Rajendra II Cola. Considering that the sons bom 
of this marriage became successively Viceroys of Vengi 
from A. D. 1077, it seems probable that this marriage 
alliance must have been contracted some years before 
Kulottunga ’s accession to the Cola throne. Madhuran- 
taki had seven sons of whom Vikrama Co]a, the succes- 
sor of Kulottunga, was perhaps the fourth. 147 She is not 
mentioned by name in any of the prasastis in the stone 
records ; it is however, possible that, as the chief queen, 
she is referred to in them as pnrana-mtdududaiydl or 
ava» i-m u[a d udaiydl, ‘the mistress of the whole world.' 
If this view is correct it follows that Dlnacintamani was 
also a surname of the same queen. 148 She seems to have 
died sometime before the thirtieth year of Kulottunga 
when Tvagavalli took her place as chief queen with the 
title puvan-a-mulududaiydl. The Kalingattupparan i, it 

may be noted, only mentions her and Elisai-vallabhi, 149 
and distinctly states that Tyagavalli enjoyed the right 
to equal authority with the king. Elisai-vallabhi is also 


"•Leyden grant, ASSI. iv. p. 224, 1. 4. 

,4< 231 of 1916. 

"'93 of 1910; 61 of 1925. 

"•247 of 1901. 

'"EL vi, p. 335. But see 811 . iii, p. 179. 

14 *&IL iii, 72, 1, 5 where she is mentioned as chief queen along with 
two others; fili&n-vallabhi and Tyagavalli; also pp. 177-8. 

14# x, vv. 54, 65. 



KULOTTUNGA i A.i>. 1070-1120 


53 


called EJulagudaiyal, ‘the mistress of the seven worlds’, 
both in the inscriptions and in the Kali ngattupparani. 
The same title is applied to Nambiratt^ar Shaman 
Arumoli-naugai in an inscription 150 of the twenty-sixth 


regnal year ; if this reference is also to the same queen, 
as most probably it is, her personal name must have been 


Arumoli-nangai. Other queens mentioned in the ins- 
criptions are : Trailokya-mahadevi who endowed a lamp 
in the Arpakkam temple in A.D. 1072, for the spiritual 

benefit of her mother Umai-nangai; 151 Solan Sorudai- 
yal alias Kadavan Mahadevi, apparently a princess of 
Pallava extraction; Tribhuvanamadevi alias Kampa- 


madevi, bom in the asterism of Svati, and a devotee of 


Yisnu, like another queen, Adittan Andakuttiyar alias 
Sola Kulavalliyar, mentioned along with her in an 


inscription from Kancipuram 152 (A.D. 1111). Two 
sisters of Kulottunga, Kundavai and Madliurantaki by 


name, are mentioned in the inscriptions from Cidam- 
baram dated in the years A.D. 1114 and 1116. 153 Besides 


his seven sons by Madliurantaki, Kulottunga had, 
as we have seen, two daughters Rajasundari and 
Suryavalli, married respectively into the royal houses 

of Kalinga and Ceylon. A fragmentary record from 
Mysore dated early in the reign, A.D. 1075, mentions a 
Pillaiyar Ammangai Alvar who was yet another 


•••SOI of 1907. The title alone without the personal name occurs 
again in 274 of 1927 in the forty-eighth year. 

•••138 of 1923. 

*”39 and 46 of 1921. 

*”117 and 119 of 1888. 



bi 


THE CO^AS 


daughter of Kulottunga. 154 A certain Rajasunu 
(prince) Madhava presented a gold diadem to Siva at 
Ramagrama about A.D. 1082; 155 the identity of this 
prince remains obscure. 

Many subordinates and feudatories of Kulottunga 

are mentioned in his inscriptions, and 
Feudatories. the more important ones among them 

may be briefly noticed here. In the 
hilly regions in the North-West of South Arcot, there 
were the Malaiyamans (mountain lords) who had the 
centre of their power in a place called Kiliyur. These 
chieftains called themselves Cediyarayar, rayas (rajas) 
of the Cedi family. Periya-uclaiyan alias Rajarajan, 156 
Sandiran Malaiyan aiias Rajendra Solan and his 
subordinates Savanasayakan alias Malaiyakularajan, 157 
Suriyan Maravan 15S and Sui'iyan Piraman Sahayan 159 
are the most noteworthy among these chieftains of 
Tirumunaippadi. There was also another Rajendra- 
sola-cediyarayan, also called Nanurruvan Attimallan 
who figures in the records of the later years 16 " of 
Kulottunga and makes gifts of land impartially to the 
Visnu temple at Tirukkoyilur and to the Siva temple at 
Siddhalingamadam. Then there were the descendants 
of the Banas, called V anako varaiyar, serving in various 

l **ARE. 191 2, II 25, suggests that she was his mother; but see 121 of 
1888. SII. iv. 226, 1. 4. 

isa 25 of 1922. 

”*246 of 1902. 

l#7 251 of 1902. 

1# *121 of 1900. 

”*359 ©f 1902. 

”°122 of 1900; 388 of 1909. 



KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


55 


capacities in the different parts of the empire. In the 
region of Paluvur in the hilly tracts of the Trichinopoly 
district to the south of the territory of the 
Malaiyamans, there are inscriptions recording gifts by 
Suttamallan Uttamasolan alias Ilangesvaran, 161 by 
Suttamallan Solakulasundaran alias Gangai-konda 

Sola-Vanakovaraiyar, and by his daughter Viccadari- 
alvar, the mother of Virudaraja-bhayankara Yana- 
kovaraiyar. 162 One wonders if Solakulasundaran 
Kaliyanapuran-gondar, who was holding a high office 
in Tunda-nadu in the thirtieth year of Kulottunga, was 
the same as the fiuttamallan noticed above; the title 
Kaliyanapurangondar has been explained as im- 
plying that he took part in the war against Yikra- 
maditya VI. 103 A Tamil inscription from Draksarama 
of A.D. 1095 1<H mentions a nobleman of Tanjai by name 
Paneanadi-vanan and his son Mudikondan, perhaps the 
same as the general who is mentioned in the Kalingat- 
tupparani ,us along with another Yanakovaraiyan 
as assisting Karunakara Tondaim'an in the expedition 
against Kalingam. In A.D. 1108 a Banaraja ordered 
Malirunjolai, a Sudra mantri with Vaisnava leanings, 
to build a beautiful mandapa in front of the Yisnu 
temple at Pennadam in the South Arcot district. 1W In 
the Kongu country including parts of modern Mysore, 
there was the ancient line of Adigar or Adigaimans with 

>•’396 of 1924; also 389, 392 and 393. 

,,, 246 of 1926; 105 of 1895. 

*•’242 of 1929; ARE. 1929, U, 33. 

“*416 of 1893. 

“*xl, v. 64. 

“•271 Of 1929, 



56 


THE CO^AS 


their capital at Tagadur (Dliarmapuri) and they, as we 
have seen, defended the Cola interest in this paid, of the 
country against aggressions from the rising power of 
the Hoysalas and fought hard, though without success, 
against the Hoysala general Gangaraja. One of them 
is mentioned in A.D. 1080 as engaged in the more peace- 
ful occupation of appointing a worshipping priest for 
reviving worship in two old and ruined temples in 
Dliarmapuri. 107 Among the vassals in the southern 
country, the Pfxndya king Srivallabha and an 
Adalaiyur-nadalvan are mentioned in Kulottunga ’s 
inscriptions of the thirty-sixth and fortieth years, and 
some Pandyan inscriptions mentioning these vassals 
also cite the regnal years of Kulottunga. 103 A certain 
Pillaiyar Visnuvardhana at whose instance the king 
makes a large land grant to the Yisnu temple at 
Tiruvendipuram in A.D. 1093 109 is otherwise unknown, 
and so is also a Pillaiyar Ylrasoladevar, perhaps the 
son of Kulottunga, mentioned in an inscription of the 
same date from North Arcot, with his wife, Yillavan 
Mahadevi, who was the daughter of a feudatory 
( araisartalaivan ) Nilagangan Acalaviman. 370 An 
inscription from Tiruvorriyur dated A.D. 1100, 171 
mentions Nanamurti-pandita alias Madhurantaka 
Brahmadhiraja of the Vatsa-gotra, a native of Nalur 
and senapati of tjie Emperor. Siyagangnn with the 
usual Cranga titles made a gift of land to a Siva temple 

*"307 Of 1901. 

*••402 of 1930; 28 and 36 of 1909. PK. p. 122. 

*••136 of 1902. 

*”300 of 1897; SIl. iii, 69. 

*’*119 Of 1912. 



KUL6TTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


57 


at Valaikkadu in the Chittoor district, 172 A.D. 1101. 
Keralakesari Adhirajadhirajadeva whose gifts to the 
Visnu temple at Tirukkannapuram ( Tan j ore district) 
are recorded in A.D. 1106 was perhaps a Kerala 
subordinate of Kulottunga ; m a certain Bharadvajan 
Mara-narayanan alias Vlrasantosa Brahma Cakra- 
vartin of Tiruppattur is mentioned as a minister alike 
of this Cera Prince and of Ills over-lord Kulottunga. 
A Ganga-nulamba chieftain is mentioned in a record 
from Minkibanda, North Areot, in A.D. 1109, as the 
mandalika of the Mul-vay-rfijya, apparently com- 
prising portions of North Areot and Mysore in this 
period. 174 Among the feudatories in the Telugu 
country, the most notable was the Velananti chief 
Gonka I, the son of Nanna, a general of E. Calukya 
Rajaraja I, and Gundambika. Gonka I was appointed 
early in the reign of Kulottunga to the chieftaincy of 
the Satsahasra country over which his descendants held 
sway for quite a long time, and in the later grants o£ 
the Velanandu line, Gonka I is called Yamsakara. 170 
Kulottunga is said also to have treated Gonka ’s son 
Coda as one of his own sons and invested him' not only 
with the emblems of his sons ( svatatiayajanacihnas ) 
but with the government of Vengimandala 16,000. 170 
Towards the close of Kulottunga ’s reign and in the early 
years of Vikrama Cola, these chiefs found themselves 

”*432 Of 1929. 

”*619 of 1922; ARE. 1923. II 33. 

,T4 568 of 1906. For extent of MulvSyrajya see 251 of 1909, 196 of 1910; 
BC . x, p. xxxiv. 

"•ARE. 1917, II. 27. 

"•EL Iv, p. 42, vv. 34-86. 

K — 8 



58 the coi^as 

constrained, as has been seen already, to acknowledge 
the suzerainty of the Western Cal.ukyas. The Telugu- 
Coda chief Pottappi Kama-Coda Maharaju is men- 
tioned in two inscriptions (A.D. 1112-3) from 
Tripurantakam along with his dandanayaka Ramanna 
and his peggada Bhimayya. 177 About the same period 
is mentioned another Telugu chieftain, mahamandales- 
vara Suraparaju of Blragotta along with his devi 
Sejama. He was undoubtedly of Pallava extraction, 
and though he called himself the ornament of the 
Nambi-kula, he bore the usual Pallava titles including 
Kancipuresvara. 178 Some years later, the Blragotta 
chiefs also had temporarily to acknowledge Western 
Calukya supremacy as is seen from a record of 
Bayyaraju, dated £. 1054 (A.D. 1132) and year 57 in 
the Calukya-Vikrama era. 170 

The best known of Kulottunga’s lieutenants are the 
two Tamil generals of his army who played the leading 
part in the conquests of the southern countries and of 
Kalingam. The important services of Naralokavira in 
the southern wars are borne out not only by the 
Vikramasolan-uld and the laudatory inscriptions of 
Cidambaram and Tiruvadi in South Arcot, but bv a 
number of inscriptions from the Pandya country which 
mention his titles and record gifts made by him. He 
was a highly respected official who enjoyed a large fief 
in Manavil and was responsible for many improvements 

1TT 262, 263 of 1905. Venkayya's date A.D. 1106-7 (IA. xxxviii, p. 8) 
for D. 68 of NL seems too early. The Saka date is 1(069). 

1TS 405 of 1893. 

1T *338 of 3893. 



KULOtTUNGA I A.D. 1070-1120 


59 

ill the old temple cities of Cidambaram and Tiruvadi. 
He is called the prime-minister of Jayadhara and he 
continued to serve Vikrama Cola after Kulottunga’s 
death . 180 For the career of the other great general who 
led the expedition against Northern Kalingam, we 
depend mainly on literary sources — the KalingaMup- 
parani and V i kramasolan-u Karunakara Tondai- 
man was apparently a descendant of the Pallavas, and 
true to the traditions of the Pallavas, J ayangondar 
describes him as born in the family descended from 
Brahma . 182 He is generally called the ruler of 
Vandainagar, which is also called Vandalaujeri in 
Tir unaraiy ur-nadu , a sub-division of Kulottunga-sola- 
valanadu in the S olamandalam , 1 8 ; and is now 
represented by Vanduvanjeri 181 in the Kumbakonam 
taluq. The inscription from Kanclpuram, which 
records these details of the situation of the fief of 
Karunakara, also mentions the name of his wife 
Alagiyamanavalani-manclaiyalvarr Karunakara had 
an elder brother whose flag displayed the usual Pallava 
emblem of a white bull, who assisted him in the 
Kalinga war , 185 and who is mentioned under the 
name Senapati-Pallavarasar in an inscription of 

180 See studies, pp. 176 ff. for a detailed account of his life and 
achievement. The most noteworthy inscription discovered since is a 

Sanskrit inscription from Attar (Tinnevelly Dt.) recording the gifts of 
Man&vatara to the local temple (405 of 1930). ARE. 1930 II, 21. 

,sl ll. 118-138. See Pandit M. Raghava Aiyangar’s Kalingattuppara%ii - 
ydrdycci. 

182 xi 30. The reading of the third line should no doubt be “majrat 
molinda padi-marapin vanda kula'\ not ‘pa<U\ 

18a 49 of 1893. 

x#4 Not Vapduiur in the Chingleput Dt. cf. Raghava Aiyangar, op. cit., 
pp. 34-6; contra till, il, p. 113, n. 3 and 2 A. xix, p. 340. 
l **PafayLi, xl, 53, 



C>0 


THE CS^AS 


A.D. 1099 from Tiruppanandal. 188 From the reference 
in the Vikmmasolan-ula it is clear that Karunakara, 
like Naralokavira, survived Kulottunga, and served 
Yikrama Cola for some years. This survey of the 
feudatories of Kulottunga gives no account of the many 
officers employed in the various departments of the civil 
administration of the kingdom whose names are men- 
tioned in the inscriptions of the reign. 


■*M6 of 1914. 



Chapter XIV 


THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I 


A.D. 1120—63 

Vikramacola ’s accession to the Cola throne took 

• » 

place on or about the 29th June, A.D. 

A vikramac6ia 1H8. 1 He must have ruled for some 

time jointly with his father, Kulottunga, 
whose latest inscriptions are dated in the fiftieth 
year, A.D. 1120, or even the fifty-second. 3 The 
asterism of Vikramacola ’s birth was Uttiradam in the 
month of Ani. 3 He inherited an attenuated empire 
confined to the Tamil country proper, and the seventeen 
years of his rule appear to have been on the whole a 
period of peace. A few inscriptions in the Ganga 
country, and a somewhat larger number from the 
Telugu area constitute the only proofs of the efforts 
made during the reign to recover lost ground — efforts 
crowned with better success in the North than in the 
Western country. 

The prasastis in Vikramacola ’s inscriptions take 

two forms, 4 both dating from his second 

Praiastis. y ear and employed throughout the 

reign. The shorter form commences 
pu madu ( magal in some versions) punara, and the 
longer one pu mdlai midaindu. Neither of these 

i Bl. vll, pp. 4-5. 

*284 of 1923 ; 5 20 of 1920; 139 of 1902. Ante, p. 49. 

•285 of 1912. 

«{0$ of 1909 and 176 of 1911; 167 of 1926. 



62 


THE COLAS 


prasastis records any specific political event other than 
the war against Kalingam and Telinga Bhlman waged 
by .Vikramacola in the early years of his viceroyalty in 
Yengi. 5 The longer prasasti undergoes, in the later 
years of the reign, 6 an important modification by the 
insertion in its middle of a passage recording tire con- 
structions and endowments made by the king in the 
temple of Nataraja at Cidambaram ; this passage 
contains a definite date in the tenth regnal year, 15th 
April, A.D. 1128. 7 The inscriptions of Y ikramacoja 
sometimes repeat passages and titles from those of 
Kulottunga. 8 

Besides the extant Vikramasdhin-ulcb, the poet 

Literature laureate Ottakkuttan composed a pa rani 

on the Kalinga war of Vikramacola. 
We learn the name of the work from the two 
other ulas of the same poet, and its authorship 
from a gloss on his Takkayayapparani.‘ J This work is 
not now available ; if it is ever recovered, it is sure to 

“Hultzsch (SJI. iii, pp. 179-81) is inclined to distinguish, three periods 
in the career of VikramacSIa. I think, that a careful study of the 
syntax of the pu mdlai mitfaindu, introduction warrants the view that the 
Kalinga war was waged in the period of the Viceroyalty of Vengi. 

•502 of 1022* (Yr. 11). 

'El. vii, p. 5. 

8 till, ii, p. 308, n. 4; EL vi, p. 224. 

•V. 776L It must be noted that OHakkfittan who mentions this para?ti 
thrice in his works does not state that be wrote it. Hultzsch considers 
this a reference to the Kalingattuppamni of Jayangond^i* which* he says, 
describes the Kalinga war waged by Kulbttunga before A.D. 1095-6, 
(SI I. iii, p. 180). In fact, Jayangond&r's work had reference to the second 
Kalinga war of Kulbttunga’s reign in which Vikramacola seems to have 
had no part The Para#i on Vikrama’s war must have ref or red to the 
earlier occasion, (we have no evidence of any other war against Kalingam), 
and might have been composed by Ktittan sometime in the reign of 
Vikramacola. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


63 


add considerably to our knowledge of this period so 
rich in quasi-historieal works of literature. 

f 

With the recall of Vikramacola to the South in 
vengi A.D. 1118 , the administration of Yengi 

passed into the hands of the V elanandu 
prince Coda, the son of Gonka I. 10 Very soon, how- 
ever, the Western Calukya King, Vikramaditya VI, 
took advantage of Vikramacola’s absence from Vengi to 
extend his sway into that kingdom and reduce the 
Velanandu chief to subjection. Soon after the death 
of Vikramaditya in A.I). 1126, Vikramacola’s supre- 
macy was re-established in the southern half, if not the 
whole, of the Vengi country. At Cebrolu in the Guntur 
district, in the heart of the region ruled over by 
Dandanayaka Anantapala some years before, the 
Mahamandalesvara Nambaya, Lord of the city of 
KolHpaka (Kulpak) and of the Satsahasra country, 
acknowledged the overlordship of Vikramacola in 
A.D. 1127. n From the same area, we have another 
inscription from Nidubrolu dated S. 1054, the seven- 
teenth regnal year of Vikramacola, in which the 
Velanandu chiefs and their dependents continue to 
acknowledge the suzerainty of the Cola emperor of the 
South. 12 The steps by which this restoration of Cola 
supremacy in the North was effected are obscure, but 
the death of Vikramaditya VI, the effort put forth by 
Vikramacola and the readiness of the Telugu chieftains 
to prefer the overlordship of the Colas to that of the 

"‘El. iv, p. 42, w. 34-5. 

”153 of 1897. Sec p. 48 ante. 

**163 of 1897. 



64 


THE COLAS 
* 


Western Calukyas must all have contributed in varying 
degrees to the restoration. 


In another direction also, Yikramaeola seems to 


Gangav&dl. 


have made an effort, not so successful, 
to recover territory lost at the close of 


his father’s reign. An inscription from Sugatur, 
dated in the second year of the reign, records the con- 
struction of a temple by an official of Yikramacoja’s 
army. 13 Another inscription of the tenth year from 


the same region in the Kolar district records the con- 


struction of a vim Cm a in Maddivala-becirak. 14 It is 


natural inference that Yikramaeola re-established the 


Cola power in the eastern part of Mysore. 


In the sixth year of the reign there was scarcity 


Flood and 
Scarcity. 


and distress consequent on a big flood 
which brought destruction to the villages 


and their crops. A fairly extensive tract of land 

4 

in the North and South Areot districts seems 


to have felt the effects of the visitation. An inscrip- 
tion 15 of A.D. 1125 from Tiruvottur (North Arcot) 
records a flood and the consequent destruction of crops 
leading to the sale of some land by the ur for raising 

money to pay the taxes of the year. In the same 
year, at Tiruvadi ( South Arcot) , the Mahasabha had to 
sell some of the common land for the same purpose on 
account of difficulty experienced in the payment of the 
land tax ( kadamaittattu ) for the sixth regnal year. 18 
In a somewhat later record of the eleventh year from 


”175 of 1911 — EC. x. Sd. 9. 
”467 of 1911 — EC. x. Sp. 61. 
”87 of 1900. 

”30 Of 1903. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


65 


Koviladi (Tanjore District), the fact is mentioned that 
the village of Tirupper became deserted owing to the 
advent of bad times ; 10a it is not certain, however, that 
this vague statement has reference to the same condi- 
tions as those noted in the two inscriptions cited above; 
if that be so, the area affected by the distress must have 
extended into the Tanjore district also. 

In A.D. 1128, Yikramaedla signalised his devotion 

to his family deity, Nataraja of 
Gifts at cidam- Cidambai'am, by devoting the bulk of 

the I'cvenue derived in the year to meet 
the cost of extensive additions to the structure of the 
Cidamharam temple and of sumptuous gifts to the 
shrine. The event is recorded in his inscriptions dating 
from the eleventh year in the following terms: 

“Out of the heap of pure gold which had been brought and 
poured out before him by kings as tribute due for the tenth year 
(after the time) when a gold leaf (set with) royal gems was 
engraved (with the words) : ‘May (the King) live long (and) 
protect this great earth y T (he) covered (with) fine gold the 

enclosure, the gate towers, halls and buildings surrounding the 
shrine of pure gold where his family-God (viz. Natesa) practises 
the tdndavn (dance), a.s if the splendid circular mountain sur- 
rounding the earth were combined with the Eastern mountain; 
covered (with) splendid gold the altar on which offerings abound, 
so that the light of heaven was reflected (by it) ; covered (with) 
pure gold and adorned with numerous strings of large round 
pearls the sacred car-temple, in order that, conferring long life 
on the delighted people, the miraculous dancer (viz. Natesa) 

*••276 of 1901 — SII. vii. 496. Kalam polIGdfty nammur alindu ku$i 
6dip-p6yk-lcidanrt(imaiyil. 

J, See fill. Hi. p. 185, n. 2. It Is possible that the benediction engraved 
on a gold leaf or plate was repeated at the end of each regnal year as it 
was completed and a new year began. 

K— 9 



66 


THE COLAS 


who occupies the (golden) hall might be drawn in procession (at) 
the great festival called ‘the festival of the great name’ 

( Pemm-peyar-vilfl ) of the great (days of) Purattadi and 
Uttirattadi, so as to cause prosperity (on) the great earth (and) 
joy to the Gods; was pleased to build a long temple street of 
mansions covered with jewels ( !) and called (it) after his royal 
prosperous name; and made numberless splendid insignia, 
beginning with dishes cut of fine gold, together with a Kalpaka 
(tree) of pure gold. Having been pleased to make gladly many 
such (gifts) in the tenth year of his reign, (in) the month of 
Sittirai. on a Sunday which corresponded to Hasta, (on) the 
thirteenth tit hi of the fortnight of the auspicious waxing moon, 1 * 
(he) covered the whole earth under the shade of a single parasol. ” 

We may not accept this high-flown account as 
literally true; but Cidambaram, the most celebrated of 
South Indian 6aiva shrines, had attracted the devotion 
of Co]a Kings as early as the reign of Parfmtaka I, if ■ 
not earlier; and after the foundation of (langai-konda- 
cola-puram and the transference of the capital of the 
kingdom from Tanjore to that place, Cidambaram rose 
in importance on account of its proximity to the new 
capital and the possibility of frequent royal visits to 
it. Tan j ore and Tirtivarur, which held the chief posi- 
tion in the days of Rajaraja I, now took a somewhat 
secondary place. It seems probable that Vikranmcoja’s 
buildings and gifts in Cidambaram were meant to 
complete ail extensive remodelling of the temple, a 
remodelling begun by Naralokavira in the closing 
years of Kulottunga ' s reign, and that, this chieftain 
had much to do with the planning and exeeu- 

**The date Is: 16th April, A.P. 1128, Kielhorn, El. vli. p. 6- 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


67 


tion of Vikramacola’s projects in the holy city. 19 
Later inscriptions call the first prakara wall of 
the temple by the name Yikramasolan-tirumaligai ; 20 
and one of the main streets round the temple bears the 
name Vikramasolan-tengu-timvidi.' 1 Though there 
is - no epigraphical confirmation of the fact, the 
Sri ran (jam, Koyilolugu states that Yikramacola built 
the fifth wall surrounding the temple of Rangunatha at 
Srirangam, besides some other structures including a 
temple of Rama. 

Some idea of the king's share in the control of the 

Royai tours administration is gained from a study of 

his personal movements incidentally 
recorded in the inscriptions of the reign. That Gangai- 
konda-sola-purarn was the capital and therefore the 
normal place of royal residence is seen from an inscrip- 
tion which mentions a senapati commanding at the outer 
gate ( pura-vatfil ) of the palace at Gangai-konda-sola- 
puram.” In A.D. 1122 the king issues an order from 
Mudi-konda-sola-puram,- 3 another name for Palaiyaru 
near Kiunbakonam. 24 The year after, he spent some 
time in a mandapa near a tank on the southern side of 
Vasaru alias KunivalanaUur in the Kaliyrir Kottam, 
(Chingleput district). 25 In 1124 again, he was in the 


'•Studies, pp. 176 ff. 

*°2S2, 284, 287 of 1913. 

!1 312 of 1913. 

,s 71 of 1926; ARE. 1926, II, 27. 

“168 of 1906. 

“271 of 1927. 

“229 of 1910; ARE. 1911, H, 27 . 



68 


THE COpAS 


South Arcot district living in a palace at Vlranarayapa- 
catur-vedimangalam, i.e., Ivattumamiarkoyil.-" Lastly, 
in the twelfth year, A.D. 1130, Vikramacola is found 
living in a palace in Cidambaram. 27 It is thus clear that 
the king was constantly touring his territories and that 
there were palaces in the more important cities, besides 
mandapas and other structures all over the country, 
ready to be used as camping places by the sovereign in 
his tours. The importance of such royal progresses for 
ensuring efficient administration in an autocratic 
mediaeval state can hardly be overrated and in under- 
taking them, Vikramacola was no doubt following the 
regular practice of the Cola rulers of this period. 


The most characteristic title of Vikramacola is 

Tyagasamudra, ‘the ocean of liberality’ 
which occurs in the inscriptions and hi 

the Vikramasdlan uld.'- s The Seweli- 


His titles and 
Queens. 


metlu Sanskrit inscription of the sixteenth year gives 
him the titles Tyagavarakara, only a variant of the 
abovementioned title, and Akalanka, ‘the spotless one,’ 28 
applied in the Kalmgatt up par a n i to Kulottunga I. 8 " 
for the rest, we have seen, that some of his inscriptions 
exaody reproduce the titles of his father including even 
the Rajakesari title, though in reality Vikrama was a 
Parakesari. Two of his queens are mentioned promi- 
nently in the inscriptions, Mukkokkilan and Tyaga- 
pataka, of whom the former was the chief till about 


”63 Of 1918. 

*163 of 1902. 

**272-3 of 1907; 49 of 1931. XM 11. 431, 662, etc. 
••El. vl. pp. 227-30. 

••lx. w. 7, 16; *111, v. 89. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNCA I A.D. 1120-63 69 


A.D. 1126-27. After her death, Tyagapataka became 
chief queen. 31 Possibly Nambirattiyar Neriyan- 
Madeviyar who is mentioned together with her 
ayapparivaram (personal retinue) in an inscription of 
the sixth year 33 from Tiruvidaimarudur was a third 
queen, of whom we do not hear elsewhere. 


A large number of feudatory chieftains and officers 
_ . t , are mentioned in the Vikramasdlan-ula, 

Feudatories. 

and in the inscriptions. The list of 
mandalikas given in the uld begins with the celebrated 
conqueror of Kal ingam, Karunakara Tondaiman. 33 
Then tfiere are mentioned in order: the chief of the 
Munaiyar, minister and warrior of Abhaya; Solakon 
who distinguished himself hi campaigns in the West 
against the Kongas, Grangas and Mahratlias; 34 the 
Brahmin Kannan of the great fortress; Vanan, dexte- 
rous in the use of his beautiful bow in battle, possibly 
the same as Suttamallan Mudikondan alias Yana- 
kovaraiyar whose devi Elvar-kulali endowed a lamp at 
Tiruvadatturai in A.I). 1120 ; 35 ICalingar-kon alias 
Naralokavira who fought with distinction, as already 

noted, in the southern wars of Kulottunga’s reign and 
was afterwards a great builder ; the Kadava who rode a 

rutting elephant and was Lord of the Senjiyar of the 
strong embattled fortress; 36 the king of Venad (South 


111. pp. 181-2. 

*>136 of 1896. 

**1I. 119 ff. 

“Curiously enough the Kaliugar are also included in the list. 

#,l 229 of 1929. A certain Kuldttungurcdja-Mahabali Ba$ar&ja of Tiru- 
v3,rQr claimed deecent from the minister of the legendary Coja king Manu. 
(164 of 1894). 

••This is perhaps the earliest mention of the fortress of 'Gingee'. 
fiefiji is called a dSvadftna of Tiruv§kamba m U4aiy6r in 159 of 1930. 



10 


THE COtiAS 


Travancore) who banished Kali from the earth {by 
good rule) ; Anantapala whose charities were well- 
known from the Kumari to the Ganges, perhaps the 
same as the Senapati Sankaran Ambalam-koyil Ivonolan 
alias Anantapalar who made a large endowment at Tiru- 
vaduturai in A.D. 1121 ; :!T the Vattava whose fierce ele- 
phant battered down the three ramparts of Northern 
Mannai which belonged to hostile kings; 33 the lord of 
the sacred Cedi country who destroyed the fortifications 
of the Karnatas in a fierce fight ; 89 the chief of 
Karanai ( ?) ever victorious in war ; Adigan who cut 
to pieces the army of North Kalinga and compelled the 
proud kings who had vowed war to seek refuge in 
flight; 40 a Nulamba-Pallava who had earned distinc- 
tion in fights at Kottar and Kollam belonging to the 
Pandyas ; the Trigarta who subdued Kongu and Coorg, 
and others including the Pandya and Kerala of whom 
no details are given and some of whom like the 
Magadha and Majava are introduced with no apparent 
historical justification. From the inscriptions we can 
gather the names of the following feudatory chieftains 

*'71 Of 1926. 

88 Mappai is. perhaps Malkhed. But we cannot say when this event 
took place. 416 of 1803 calls Mudikopdan, w'hose elephant is specially 
mentioned, the king of the Vattar. 

*»By the Cedi country the poet means the land of the Cedir&yas, the 
hilly area round about TirukkoyilUr, Kijiydr, etc. In the inscriptions 
there are three Malaiyamkn chieftains mentioned : (1) Malaiyam&n 

Tirukkala Maxundan AAvangak&ra Malaiyaman, (408 of 1909); 
(2) Ubaiyan alia# Vikramac6|a*cediyarayan (286 of 1902: 371 of 1908); 
and (3) Sdxxiyaa Raman alias Rajendra§6Ja Malaiyakularajan (177 of 
1906 ; called Malaiyan Malian in 373 of 1908). 

40 Adigan'8 part in the Kalinga war is not mentioned in the 
Ralingattupparanl or the inscriptions. It should be remembered, however, 
that another Kaiingapparaiii by OttakkOttan is no longer accessible. 



THE SUCCESSORS OP KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


71 


and families of the Tamil country : fSurai N ayakan alias 
Madhavarayan, son of Arumbakkilan Ponnambalak- 
kuttan alias Naralokavira; 41 the Sambuvarayas of the 
Sengeni line, afterwards an important dynasty of quasi- 
independent rulers in the region of North Arcot, repre- 
sented in this reign by Ammaiyappan whose wife 
endowed a matha at Tiruvallam in A.D. 1123 42 and who 
was perhaps the same as Sengeni Nalayiravan Ammai- 
yappan alias Rajendrasola Sambuvarayan of other 
records, 43 and Rajanarayana after whom Kalavai was 
named Rajanarayana-caturvedi-mangalam ; 44 Sundan 
Gangaikond an alias Tuvarapati Vejan who maintained 
a large force of swordsmen ( valilar ) whom he seems to 
have employed on constant military duty in the 
neighbourhood of Sivapuri (Ramnad district) ; 45 a cer- 
tain Pandi-nadu-kondan, one of whose gifts is recorded 
at Tiruvellarai in A.D. 1133 ; 40 and the Salukkis of 
Tondaimandalam residing at Anaivari. 47 Likewise the 
following are noteworthy among the vassals in the 
Telugu area: Maliaman dale s va ra Bettarasa mling in 
Pottappi-nadu in A.D. 1121, 48 who seems to have been 
succeeded in the charge of that province by Maha- 
mandalesvara Vimaladityadeva alias Madhurantaka 
Pottappic-cola, son of Siddarasa and descendant of 

*>128 Of 1930. 

*'232 of 1921. 

*>422 of 1922; 400 Of 1922; 63 of 1900. 

**229, 230 of 1901. 

“47 Of 1929. 

“521 of 1905. 

*’378 of 1913. 

*•688 of 1907. 



72 


THE COfcAS 


Karikala; 40 Kannaradeva alias Rajendrasola Pottap- 
pic-colan, son of Kamarasar, mentioned in an 
inscription from Kalaliasti in A.D. 1130 ; 50 
Kongayan (Yelananti Gonka II), son of Rajendra-sola 
Gangeyarajan of Yeli-nadu (Velanadu), who is 
mentioned in inscriptions from Kalaliasti together with 
his minister Vasanan, 51 and whose da/ndddhipa and 
mdtula Maraya Panda extended his power greatly by 
conquest and annexation and built a fine iS iva temple at 
Iksupalli; 52 nambaya, Lord of Kojlipaka, already 
mentioned ; 53 and Mahamandalesvara Ghattideva- 
maharaja alias Yikramasola Kanupparudaiynr Pudoli- 
yaraiyar 54 who is mentioned in an inscription of the 
reign from Kajahasti and who was doubtless of the same 
family of feudatories as Naranadeva, a contemporary 
of the Cola emperor Yirarajendra, 65 and the later 
Yadavarayas who described themselves as Sasikula- 

calukkis. 

• 

Kulottunga II must have been chosen as heir- 
n. apparent by his father Yikramacola 
sometime in May- July A.D. .1133 as his 
regnal years are counted in his inscriptions from this 
date as the starting point,. 58 Yikramacoja ’s rale 

*•579 of 1907, (A.D. 1125): 100 of 1922. Siddharasa was the elder 
brother of Bettarasa. Vimaladitya had a son, Sdmegvara, who built a 
g&pura at Nandalflr, (611 of 1907). 

®°102 of 1922. 

ei 103, 108 of 1922. ARE. 1922, II, 20. 

•*163 of 1897. 

••Ante, pp. 48, 63. 

••156 of 1922. 

••266 Of 1904. 

"EL x, p. 138; xi, p. 287. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


73 


continued for a period of about two years thereafter. 
The prasastis in his inscriptions take many forms, all of 
them purely rhetorical and in hyperbolical praise of the 
excellence of his rule, but not vouchsafing a single fact 
of the history of the reign . 57 In one inscription he is 
described as £ the king who wore the crown in such wise 
as to add lustre to Tillamagar ’.' 8 This may mean that 
Kulottunga II celebrated a coronation in the city of 
Cidambaram 59 or that in Ihe reign of Kulottunga II, 
the city of Cidambaram was vastly improved and 
beautified. The renovation of the temple and city of 
Cidambaram is, in fact, the best known event of the 
reign and is explicitly mentioned for the first time in 


an inscription of the seventh year from Tiruppuram- 
biyam ', 00 though a title based on this act occurs as early 
as the third year. The Kulottunga-solan-ula gives 
an elaborate account of the remodelling of the 
Cidambaram temple carried out by Kulottunga .® 1 It 

starts by saying that with his peerless 


His works at 
Cidambaram. 


queen who had the light to share the 
honours of the throne with him, 


Kulottunga went and worshipped the Dancing Sfva of 


,7 The beginnings of the chief forms of the pra&astis with the time of 
their earliest occurrence may be noted: 

Pit mcunnu pdvai — 56 of 1893 of the 2nd year; 

Pit marttviya puvi elum — 85 of 1895 of the same year. 

Pil 'meya vafar — 422 of 1904 of the same year; 

Pft vnannu padumam — 255 of 1929 of the 3rd year; 

Ptl rndvu tirumagal — 572 of 1907 of the 8th year; and 
Pit mannu ydyar — 83 of 1895 of the 15th year. 

See also ARE. 1913, II, 35. 

••155 of 1902. 

•*The Periyapurdnam ( CagdeSura v. 8) — mentions that five cities 
shared the honour of witnessing the coronations of Cdla kings. 

«°350 of 1927. ARE. 1927, II, 24. 

•*1L 69-116. 

K— 10 



74 


THE COIjAS 


Cidambaram, and that he removed the little God ( Visnu) 
from the courtyard of the Sacred Hall of Tillai. 08 
The new constructions undertaken and carried out by 
the king are then detailed. These include go pur arm 
with seven tiers and the shrine of the goddess which 
delighted her heart so much by its size and its splendour 
that she did not think any more of the sacred mountain 
(Himalaya) that gave birth to her. Various parts of 
the temple and the city are also said to have been 
‘covered with gold’. The same facts are recorded more 
briefly in the Rajarajarsolan-ida 83 and the Takkayugap- 
parani* 4 by the same poet. It is not clear in what 
relation these works attributed to Kulottunga II stand 
to those attributed to Vikramacola in his inscriptions 
dating, as noticed above, from his eleventh year. We 
have perhaps to assume that the work started in 
Vikramacola ’s reign, if not earlier, was not completed 
till some years after the accession of Kulottunga II.“ 


. **363 of 1907 seems to open with a reference to this fact and this part 
of the inscription seems to have been wantonly damaged as the rest of 
it is in excellent preservation. Perhaps the earliest reference to the 
relative positions of the shrines of Govindar&ja and Natarftja in Cidam- 
baram is that of Mapikkav&gagar in his TirukkOvaiydr v. 86. Several 
ancient temples appear to have had shrines both to Siva and Vi$pu, and 
there seems to have been at one period a deliberate attempt to harmonise 
the relations between the followers of the two deities, an attempt giving 
rise to the cult of Sankaran&r&yapa. The sectarianism of a later age 
proved itself intolerant of the eclectic arrangements of an earlier time, 
and Cidambaram in particular has been the scene of unfortunate and 
acrimonious litigation in recent years between the custodians of the two 
shrines, who are perpetuating the bad tradition started, so far as we know, 
by Kulottunga II. 

•• 11 . 58 - 66 . 

“vv. 777, 808-10. 

“ABE. 1913, II, 34; 1927, II, 24. 



*THE SUCCESSORS OP KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 75 

The reign of Kulottunga appears to have been a 

period of peace, good government and 

Peaceful reign, prosperity. There is no record of any 

warfare, and in fact, with the exception 
of the removal of the shrine of Govindaraja from its 
place in Cidambaram indicating the growth of sectarian 
intolerance, we hear of nothing calculated to disturb the 
tranquillity of life in the Cola dominions. The extent 
of the empire was maintained as it was at the close of 
Vikramaebja’s reign, and the Celiur plates show, if 
anything, that the restoration of Cola suzerainty in the 
North after its temporary eclipse by the spread of 
Western Cajukya rule was complete and stable. The 
inscriptions of this reign from the Telugu country are 
more numerous than those of the preceding one. Some 
of the best work in Tamil literature was produced in 
this period, and Ottakkuttan, Sekkilar and Kamban 
were all patronised by Kulottunga II and his vassals. 

Gangaikonda-solapuram continued to be the 

capital of the kingdom’ 66 though 
capital, titles, etc. Kulottunga, as we have seen, had a 

partiality for Cidambaram. The king 
is stated to have been residing in his palace at Vikrama- 
s6la-puram in the third year of his reign. 67 Two 
queens of Kulottunga are mentioned in an inscrip- 
tion of his second year from Tirumalavadi : the chief 
queen being Tyagavalli also called Bhuvanamulu- 
dudaiyal, and the other Mukkokkilan, a princess of the 

“Kulottunga&Olan uli, 1. 118. 


•’271 of 1915; 533 of 1921. 



76 


THE CO^AS 


family of Malaccas (Malaiyamans) . os Of the titles 
borne by the king, Anapaya is the most characteristic 
and occurs not only in the inscriptions and in the uld 
on him, but is also borne by his secretary Anapaya- 
muvendavelan who attests the king’s orders. In several 
places lands granted by the king w r ere designated 
Anapaya-nailur . 09 He is also called : ‘the Perumal who 

covered the Sacred Perambalam with gold ’, 70 ‘Tiru- 
nirruccola ’, a title also borne by Kulottunga I and hence 
the cause of some confusion in regard to the date of 
Sekkilar , 71 Edirili-sola and Kalikadinda-sola . 72 The 
inscriptions of the reign of Kulottunga, like those of 
Vikramacola, record several gifts by his subordinates 
and feudatories, and of these the following are note- 
worthy. Among Sengeni chieftains, there was besides 
Nalayiravan Ammaiyappan 73 who has been noticed 
already under Vikramacola, a certain Ammaiyappan 
Kannudaipperumal aliasV ikramasSla Sambuvarayan . 71 
It is perhaps worthy of note that Kannudaipperumal 
appears to have been the son of Sengeni Ammaiyappan ; 
the aliases of the father and son, Rajendrasola 
and Vikramasola, appear to indicate that the Sengepi 
chiefs followed the habit of calling their male children 
after the ruling Cola sovereign whose feudatories they 

♦’85 of 1895. 

**271 of 1915; 533 of 1921; 346 of 1911 and 531 of 1912 mention an 
officer Anapaya Muvenda V€|&n. 

T0 167 of 1902. 

* 

’*863 of 1911; 312 of 1901, and &m Tamil, xxv. pp. 271-5, ARE, 1912, 
21, 27. 

”255 of 1929; 380 of 1908. 

”298, 302 of 1929. 

”802 Of 1897; 343 of 1912; 422 of 1921. ARE. 1918, II, 40. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.0. 1120-64 57 

were. Mohan Alkkolli alias Kulottunga-solak-kadava- 
rayan was a chieftain of Pallava extraction who had 
charge of the policing of a small area near Tirumanikuli 
in the South Areot district about A.D. 1136. 75 In the 
course of the next few years this Kadava chieftain 
attained a more important position and his inscriptions 
appear in different places like Tirunamanallur, 
Tiruvadi and Vrddhacalam, and in them he is given 
many names and titles expressive of his growing 
importance; and his gifts and charitable works also 
become more ostentatious. In 1140, he presents gold 
ornaments and silver vessels to Tiruttondisvara at 
Tirunamanallur and he -bears the names Kudaltir Pajli - 
Alappirandan Mohan and Kulottunga-solak-kacciya- 
rayan. 70 About the same time he presented a jewelled 
necklace to the deity of Tiruvadi. 77 Five years later, he 
made over to the temple at Tiruvadi the perumbadikaval 

on some lands and properties, and he bears now the 

* 

additional titles Pahnaka Muttaraiyan Alappirandan 
Arasanaraya^an, 78 and Kudalur is stated to be situated 
in Perugalur-nadu of Tirumunaippadi. In 1146, he 
made over to the Tiruvadi temple some further taxes 
and dues from three devadana villages located in his 
beat, and on this occasion he styled himself Kudalur 
Paunaka Muttaraiyan Alappirandan Elisaimohanana 
Kulottunga-sola Kadavarayan. 7 ” Lastly in A.D. 1148, 

**157 Of 1902. 

* * 

*•374 of 1902. 

”391 of 1921; see also 467 of 1921 (Ti/uvepvainallur). At ARE. 1 922, 
II, 39 the former record Is assigned to the reign of KulOttunga III with 
confusing results. 

T, 45 of 1903. 

”46 of 1903. 



78 


THE CO^AS 


he built a mandapa called Elisai-mohan for the 
mahasnapana of the deity at Vrddhacalam, and in 
recording this act he called himself Alappirandan 
Elisaimohan alias Kulottunga-sola Kadavar-Adittan. 80 
These records reveal to us the beginnings of the 
feudatory family from which sprang the celebrated 
Kopperun j inga whose boisterous career shook the Cola 
empire to its foundations and hastened its downfall. 
The policing of another part of the same district was 
held by Rajaraja Magadai-nadalvan, one of the minor 
Rapa chieftains who ruled in the Magadai-nadu, or 
Nadu-nadu as it is called in Tamil literature. 81 Of the 
Malaiyaman or Cedi chieftains of the region round 
Tirukkoyilur, mention is made of V ikramacola- 
cediyarayan and his son Vikramacoia Kovalarayan, 8 - 
and Kiliyur Malaiyaman Kulottunga-sola Cediya- 
rayan. 83 Two other feudatories of the Tamil country 
mentioned most casually in the inscriptions of the reign 
are a Nulambar and an Adiyaman.* 1 A Ganga 
chieftain tSiyagangan with the usual bii*udas of his 
family is fomid making a gift to the temple at 
Kalahasti 83 about A.I). 1147. In the same region the 
Yadavarayas occupy a position of some eminence as one 
of them Ghattideva alias Kulottunga-sola-yadavaraya 
made the gift of a whole village for feeding Brahmins, 
lapasvis and others in the temple (1139 A»D.) H0 

••1ST ot 1180. 

•>14 0(1903. 

*>385 at 1903. 

"384 of 1903. 

"86 of 1930; 308 of 1901. 

"93 of 1933. 

"88 of 1932. Perhaps the earliest known member of this family Is 
X&raoadSva of an Inscription of Vlrarhjendra's reign from YOgl 
MaUavaram. (366 of 1904). 



THE SUCCESSORS OP KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


79 


The inscriptions from Vengi-desa mention Maha- 
mandalesvara Ballaya Coda whose queen made an 
endowment of six cdmaramadas for a lamp in the temple 
at Bapatla in g. 1057 (A.D. 1135) ; 87 Yelananti Coda 
whose queen Gundambika also endowed a lamp in the 
same place the next year; 88 Yelananti Kulottunga Coda 
Gonka by whom Gonka II seems to be meant — for (1) a 
relative of his endowed a lamp at Draksarama in S. 1061 
(A.D. 1139), 80 (2) Somandiyamma, a queen of his, made 
a gift to the temple of Bhavanarayana at Prempalli 90 
in S. 1066 (A.D. 1145), (3) he made a considerable gift 
by himself, at Kalahasti about A.D. 1146, 91 and in the 
company of a Tribhuvanamalla Coda Maharaja at 
Konidena in 1148 ; 92 Pandaraja, apparently a brother 
of Gonka II, whose wife Nagambika gave twelve 
birudamadas for a lamp in the temple at Bapatla; 93 
Kandravati Bhlmaraja who gave lands to the dancing 
girls attached to the Saktisvara temple at Nutakki 
in S. 1059 (A. D. 1137), 04 and Tribhuvanamalla Cdda- 
maharaja, (mentioned above), who makes a gift 
to the temple at Konidena ; 95 Katamanayaka of 
Kolanu who gave away a whole village as brahma - 
deya in A.D. 1143," and who seems to be 

•’210 of 1897. ARE. 1900, paragraph 47. 

•*182 of 1897. The text Is restored as Gonka in 811 . vi. 142: I think 
It must be Cd<Ja. 

•*227 of 1893, contra , El, iv. p. 38; but see ARE, 19? 7, II, 27. 

•°174 of 1897. 

•»123 of 1922. 

••189 of 1899. 

•*176 of 1897. 

•*116 of 1917. 

••185 of 1899; ARE. 1900, paragraph 47. NT. O: 142. Also n. 92 

••Citttir plates — I A, xiv. pp. 56 If, 



80 


THE CO^AS 


identical with the Kollurinatha Bhlma whose wife 
Medama endowed a lamp at Prempalli in S. 1067 
(A.D. 1145) 07 and with the Mahamandalika Bhima- 
nayaka, Vengi-desa-calukya-ankakara, whose Sandhivi- 
grahin Somaya Preggada’s gifts to various temples are 
recorded in an inscription of A.D. 1147 at Bapatla; 08 
and lastly, Madhurantaka Pottappiccola Siddharasa, 
one of whose inscriptions" found at Nandalur clearly 
attests the extent of the Cola empire in that direction. 
A curious inscription from Tirugokarnam in the 
Pudukkottah state mentions a clan of Brahmins who 
exercised the right of crowning kings and who had been 
settled in the Ten-kavira-nadu by the king Killi who 
had a regard for their ancient connection with the 
great city of Tuvarai (Dvaraka). 100 The presence in 
the Pandya coimtry of Lambakarnas with special 
duties at the coronation of a king is noticed in the 
Mahavamsa . 101 

The latest regnal year found in the inscriptions of 

Kulottunga II is the sixteenth or the 
seventeenth ; this means his reign came 
to a close about A.D. 1150. Some four years before this 
date, he associated his son 102 Rajaraja II in the actual 
conduct of the administration, and in the inscriptions 
of Parakesari Rajaraja his regnal years are counted 
from' some date after the 6th April in A.D. 1146. 103 Of 

•’168 of 1897. 

••172 of 1897. 

•'672 of 1907. 

’••411 of 1902; Pd. 120. 

»*«CV. ch. 77. v. 28 and n. 1. 

** % RdjardjarMlan-uUl t 11. 66-7. 

*•*#/. Jx, p. 210. 


RSJarSja II. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNOA I A.D. 1120-63 


81 


tlie reign of Rajaraja II many inscriptions have been 
preserved which contain a number of prasastis which 
attest the extent of his kingdom and disclose the names 
and positions of a number of feudatories. Judging 
from the silence of these inscriptions on the military 
transactions of the reign, one may infer that, like the 
reign of Kulottunga II, that of Rajaraja II was 
generally peaceful. The most common prasasti of the 
reign is that commencing pi l maruviya, tirumadum 
which gives a high-flown account of the benefits of 
Rajaraja’s rule and appears for the first time in 
inscriptions of the third year . 104 This mentions one 
queen who is called Avanimulududaiyal and is said to 
have sat on the throne along with the king. Much 
longer, but equally unhistorical, is another prasasti, 
also dating from the third year ; 105 this commences 
pH maruviya poh'l elum and, among other things, 
emphasises the flourishing condition of Tamil literature 
in the reign by calling the king ninttamillihiit-talaivan, 
the patron of the three-fold Tamil ; loa three queens are 
mentioned at the end of this prasasti besides Avani- 
mulududaiyal mentioned above, two of these being called 
by the almost identical titles Bhuvana-nmlududaiyaj. 
and Dharani-mulududaiya], and the third Ulagudai 
Mukkokkilan, doubtless the same as the queen men- 
tioned in two other inscriptions of the fourteenth and 
seventeenth years of the reign . 107 Two other prasastis 

*°*466 of 1919. 

*0*243 of 1930. 

Jfl0 Iyal, I§ai, and N&dagam — roughly prose and poetry, song and 
drama. 

i 

,0T 16 of 1903; 369 of 1911. Bhtivanamuiududaiy§4 is also mentioned 
In RdjarGjan uld , 1. 78. 

K— 11 



82 


THE CSLAS 


also occur in the inscriptions of the reign, and they 
begin pupal vdyttu valam peruga 108 and kadalsfilnda 
par mddar . 109 The former occurring in a record of the 
fifth year of Rajaraja II was subsequently adopted by 
Kulottunga III in whose inscriptions an account of his 
Pandyan invasion is inserted in the body of this rather 
short introduction. Likewise the latter, occurring in a 
record of Rajaraja’s tenth year, becomes the chief 
prasasti of the reign of Rajadhiraja II, and it is note- 
worthy that the queen mentioned at the end of this 
prasasti is called Ulagudai Mukkokkilan-adigal in the 
inscriptions both of Rajaraja and Rajadhiraja , 110 a 
clear proof that this is a title, not the personal name, of 
the chief queen. 


The extent of the empire under Rajaraja’s rule is 

borne out by the provenance of his 
Extent of empire, inscriptions. An inscription 111 of the 

seventh year from Kendatti recording 
the construction, of a temple by a Kaduvetti chief! a in on 
a hill at tSurur in Kuvah'ila-nadu, the mention in a 
fragmentary record 1 ' 2 from Ihe Salem district of 
Tagadur-nadu in Ganga-naclu, a sub-division of 
Nigarili-sola-mandalam, and a gift recorded at 


10, 165 of 1908. 

109 219 of 1901. ARE. 1909, II, 48-50, discusses the relations between 
Rajaraja II, Rajadhiraja II and Kulottunga III as seen from these 
pratiastis. It is said there: ‘It must be noted that the titles R&jakesari 

and Parakesari are applied to these kings indiscriminately'. I do not 
think this is correct; there are, of course, a few mistakes in some records 
where one title appears for another; but their number is not enough to 
warrant the general observation cited above. See also ARE. 1904, para. 21. 

11D Ct 219 of 1901 and 688 of 1904. 

«*486 of 1911. 

**•18 of 1900. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


83 


Pei-umber 113 in A.D. 1164 by a person who calls himself 
Tagadur Kilavan, show that in Kongu and the eastern 
part of the Ganga country, the Cola hegemony still 
continued to be recognised in some maimer. In the 
Telugu country, Rajaraja’s suzerainty is clearly 
attested by a fair number of stone inscriptions found 
throughout the Vengi coimtry up to Draksarama, 114 
though it is clear that the feudatory chiefs of Velanandu 
were becoming more and more independent and over- 
bearing. As a matter of fact, from the dose of the 

•I' 

reign of Kulottunga I when, as we have 

^weAkness” 8 sce11 ’ 8’ rea ^ disasters befell the Cola 

empire, and its extent became greatly 
circumscribed by the successes of the Hoysalas 
and the Western Calukyas, the most remark- 
able phenomenon within the empire was the steady 
growth in the power and influence of local dynas- 
ties. The hold of the central administration 
over the outlying parts of the empire had 
always been less firm than in the districts nearer the 
capital; but by the end of Rajaraja II ? s rule, the 
administrative system was betraying signs of weaken- 
ing even at its centre. The monarchy is no longer the 
vigorous autocracy that it was, ever active in the pursuit 
of war and glory, in the maintenance of order and the 
promotion of costly and essential enterprises of public 
utility. The inscriptions give clear indications of the 

increasing helplessness of the king in the face of the 

« 

growing turbulence of his vassals, who, while acknow- 

”•267 of 1901. 

”*216 of 1898. 



84 


THE C6^AS 


ledging the nominal suzerainty of their overlord, 
play a more prominent part than the suzerain or his 
government in the conduct of the affairs of the area 
under their control. The system of village administra- 
tion with its autonomous local assemblies seems to have 
been generally unaffected by the changed situation; 
but the strength of the centralised bureaucratic 
administration so laboriously planned and built up by 
Rajaraja I and his successors was gone. 

Gangapuri no doubt continued to be the 

capital of the kingdom. The inscrip- 

Capital, titles, etc. * . b f 

tions ot the reign say little of the 
king’s movements or of his part in the admi- 
nistration. One record of the thirteenth year 115 
shows him residing at Ayirattali. Of the titles 
of Rajaraja, the most noteworthy us it occurs both 
in the inscriptions and in the j Ra jam jan-ul a is 
Colendrasimha . 1 lu Another title commonly applied to 
him in literature, but not traceable in epigraphy, is 
Kandan . 117 The concluding venba in the ula also calls 
him Viradhara and Virodaya. From the inscriptions, 
it is clear that Rajaraja also took to himself the titles 
Rajagambhira and Edirilisola , 118 and possibly also 
Neriyudaiccola. 

Among the feudatories of Rajaraja may be noticed 

Feudatories. first a g ran ^ son of that Narasinga- 

varman , 110 who is said to have been 

’“163 of 1906. 

”•336 of 1917; itld 11. 252; 685. 

1 1 T Takkaydgapparaxii, v. 549 and n. 

,J *128 of 1929; 46 of 1914. 

”•119 of 1900. 



THE SUCCESSORS Of KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 85' 

crowned under that name c. A.D. 1058, to have ruled 
the Maladu 2000 country, and to have built the Visnu 
temple of Tirukkovalur. Round about the same region 
we have two other Malaiyaman chieftains, Malaiyaman 
Periya-udaiyan Nirerran alias Rajaraja Malaiya-kula- 

rajan, 120 and Malaiyaman Attimallan Sokkapperumal 
alias Rajagambhira Cediya-raya of Kiliyur. 121 In what 
relation, if any, these two Malaiyamans stood to each 
other and to the grandson of Narasingavarman 
mentioned above is not clear. The Kadavas are 
represented by Kudalur Alappirandan Mohan alias 
Rajarajak-kaclavarayan 122 who is probably identical 
with Kulottungasolak-kadavarayan of the previous 
reign, and by Raj endra sola Pallavar-adittan, 123 who 
is called also the lord of Kanelpura. The former 
assigned to a temple at Elvanasur a consider- 
able number of taxes and dues for its expenses, 
while the latter built a stone temple on a hill in the 
Kolar district. There was also Pallavarayar of Karigai 
Kulattur who built the stone temple of Rajarajesvaram 
U daiyar in Pallavarayanpettai and, as we shall see, 
played a leading 124 part after the death of Rajaraja II. 
Two !§engeni chieftains are mentioned : a certain 
Nittavinoda Sambuvarayan, 125 whose wife, 6lrudaiyal, 

”•163 of 1906. 

121 411 of 1909. Perhaps he was the same as Ak&ra£&ran of an inscrip- 
tion from Jambai (102 of 1906) dated in the 14th year of Tribhuvana- 
cakravartin Kulottunga (II). 

12 *166 of 1906. 

19 *4$6 of 1911. 

* 24 434, 435 of 1924. 

12 *168 of 1918. 



86 


THE) COJiAS 


endowed a lamp at Brahmadesam in South Areot, and 
Rajanarayana Sambuvarayan, also called Amniai- 

m 

yappan Slyan Pallavandan whose gifts are recorded at 
Munnur and Acearapakkain . 128 The alias of Raja- 
narayaria, it may be noted in passing, seems to imply a 
dynastic connection between the Sengerus and the 
Kadavas. Other notable chiefs in the Tamil country 
were : Kulottungasola Kadambarayan, one of w T kose 
gifts is recorded at Kudumiyamalai in the Pudukkottah 
State , 127 and Sendan Kuttaduvan alias Eajaraja 
Vangara .Muttaraiyan who had the pddikuval of 
the region near Tittagudi in South Arcot 128 
and the pallikkani of the taniyilr Pcnnagadam . 120 
Among the local rulers in the Telugu country 
who acknowledged Rajaraja’s overlordship, the chief 
were: Tribhuvanamalla-deva Coda Maharaju 130 and 
Jikkideva Coda-Maha r;i,ja , 1 3 1 both claiming descent 
from Karikala; the lvona Rajendra Lokaraja ; 112 
Kondapadumati Buddliaraja ; 133 Kulottmiga Rajendi'a 
Co^aya of tlie Yelananti family whose officeis 
bhandari I\Lupphia\'aka and Guddavadi-;:? udali 
Bliimanayaka are mentioned in inscriptions from 
Draksarama , 531 and kottari Errama-nayaka in a record 


*”52 of 1919; 244 of 1901. 
,8, 355 Of 1904— Pd. 135. 

*”16 of 1903. 

18 *28 Of 1908. 

‘•*203 of 1897. 

**‘193 of 1897. 

*”213 of 1897. 

*”216 of 1898. 

”*217, 218, 225 Of 1893. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


87 


from the Nellorc district; 135 besides Surapa mentioned 
in a record at Konidena, 130 and Rama, the son of Kanda 
or Kandena, chief of Ivondfmi who made gifts to the 
temple called Rajarajesvara in that city. 137 Mention is 
made also of a Mahasamanta Jiyyaru Varu in an 
inscription of the tenth year from Janakavaram in 
Nellore. 138 

The latest certain regnal year cited in Raja raja’s 

End of the Reign, inscriptions is 26. 189 One record from 

Tiruvorriyur seems to give the twenty- 
seventh year, though the first figure in this date is not 
free from doubt. Another inscription from Konidena 
gives 28, but the Saka date is missing. 140 The end of 
Raja raja’s reign would therefore fall about A.D. 1173. 
The inscriptions of his successor Rajadhiraja II date 
the commencement of his reign from some day in the 
month of March, A.D. 1163 ; 141 it is clear from one of 
these 142 that Rajadhiraja was not the son of 
Riijaraja, but like Rajnraja himself, a grand- 
son of Vikramacola, and that he was chosen by Rajaraja 

to succeed him on the Cola throne as there was no one 

* 

in the direct line suitable for the purpose. 143 Within a 

'••NI, 0:59. 
lM 181 of 1899. 

’*’695, 696 Of 1920. 

'•‘NT. 0:51. 

’"•TOS, 704 Of 1920. 

M0 181 of 1899. 

'*'EL ix. p. 211. But see p. 93 below. 

14a 433 of 1924, contra. ARE . 1909, II, 48. 

14 *433 of 1924 is a difficult inscription and raises some problems 

in the chronology of the period. From Note O. that follows it will be 
seen that the gaps in the record greatly obscure its meaning. 



88 


THE CO^jAS 


few years of the choice of Rajadhiraja for the succes- 
sion, a great civil war convulsed the Pandya country in 
the south and the Colas were compelled to take sides in 
the war to check the growth of Ceylonese influence on 
the mainland. The war had practically closed by the 
time of Rajaraja’s death, but as its details are narrated 
in the records of Rajadhiraja II and Kulottunga III, 
they will be considered in the next chapter. 



Note C — on the Pallavarayanpettai inscription 

(433 of 1924). 

This inscription of the 8th year of Rajadhiraja II is noticed 
at some length in ARE . 1924, Part II, paragraphs 19 — 21. It 
has been edited by Somasundara Desikar ( QJMS . Vol. xix, 

pp. 57 ff.), who differs from the official epigraphist (Venkoba 
Rao) and holds that the inscription does not support the view 
that Kulottunga III was a son of Rajaraja II and a baby at the 
time of his father’s death. I think that Desikar is right on this 
point. But a careful consideration of this difficult record in the 
light of the data to be gathered from other contemporary inscrip- 
tions lias led me to conclusions different from those of the two 
writers cited above, and considering the importance of the 
inscription for the history of this period, I proceed to examine it 
in detail. V. Venkatasubbaiya has also edited this inscription in 
El. xxi. pp. 184 — 93. 

The text given by Desikar in QJMS. is inaccurate in many 
ways, particularly because he has introduced emendations 
not all of which have been explained in his notes. The text 
published in the El. is much more dependable, and agrees closely 
with the transcript sent me by S. K. Govindaswami who studied 
the inscription in situ . 

Lines 1 — 4 contain the usual prasasti of Rajadhiraja and 
the regnal year in words and call for no remarks. Lines 5 — 14 
deal with the official position held by Pallavarayar and the 
part he played in the choice and coronation, of Rajadhiraja, 
first as heir-apparent to Rajaraja and then as his successor 
after his death, and this section, which is unique in its 
account of the circumstances of Rajadhiraja^ accession, is also 
the most difficult to interpret on account of the gaps in the 
record. Lines 14 — 21 describe the part of Pallavarayar in the 
Pandya Civil War and the expulsion of the Ceylonese forces from 

K— 12 



90 


THE COJ^AS 


the P&ndya country. Then follows the statement (1. 21) that 
he died of some disease, and the rest of the inscription records 
the gift of forty vclis of iraiyili land to his relations and depen- 
dents by king Rajadhiraja in his eighth regnal year (11. 21 — 28 ) t 
the gift being attested by several officers of government 
(11. 28 — 30). If this analysis of the record is correct, it follows 
that this record is dated after the death of Pallavarayar which 
took place after that of Rajaraja II. 

The general construction of 11. 5 — 14 may now be indicated ; 
Pallavarayar (5 — 6), perru ninru (7), parigarittu (10), tiru 
abhisekam pannuvittu (13) T4,a , oni padiyum panni (14) . Ail the 

actions indicated by the participles quoted were thus the acts 
of Pallavarayar, and this fact must be firmly grasped. Line 3 
is simple and gives details of the name and title of Pallavarayar 
and the location of his fief. The words that follow and end with 
perru ninru explain the status of Pallavarayar. Though this 
general sense is clear, the exact import of the phrases employed 
is somewhat obscure. The whole passage may be rendered thus : 
“ having become the Captain (mudaligal) of the ten 
ledyil-kottus 144 of Periyadevar Rajarfijadevar and of the depart- 
ments ( tur algal ) including the elephant (corps), cavalry and 
agambadi-niydyam, having duties similar to those of all mudalis, 
and being in receipt of all honours including mun eval due to 
mudalis.” The ten koyil-kottus remind one of the passage in 

the Kdyil-olugu describing how Ramanuja amplified the temple- 
organisation at Srirangam by dividing the attendants of the 
deity ( parijanangal ) into ten groups ( kottu), which took the 

place of the earlier and more restricted establishment of five 
kottus. The idea seems to be that Pallavarayar had the control 

14, *In l. 13 V. V. reads Sellumbadi pawi[vittarulQndr; my text lias 

paiftni u ndr . I think the word is not a finite verb, but a participle 

and a noun which should form the subject of the following verb migai 
ieyydda pa$L 

a44 V.V, reads pGrttu k&yir-kottum , and translates ‘big household*. Also 
i ivark-kudirai , ‘body of armed cavalry*, for my dnai(k)-kudirai. 



Me successors of kulottunga i a.d. 1120-63 9 i 

of the entire palace ( kdyil ) establishment. The term agambadi - 
nigd if am may imply the power to settle disputes among palace 

servants in immediate attendance on the king. 145 The meaning 
o£ imm-cval is more difficult; literally it means ‘first 

command/ 14 5 

The next part of the inscription ending with parignritta 
(1. 10) begins with the mention of Rajaraja’s death, and narrates 
the action taken by Pallavarayar for the protection of the king’s 
children who were aged one and two years and of his harem and 
treasures. On account of the tender age of the children, 
Pallavarayar had to remove them from the camp (padai- vldu) at 
Ayirattali to another place, evidently to insure their safety ; the 
gaps in 1. 9 render the drift of the passage extremely uncertain, 
but we may be sure that Pallavarayar succeeded in his main object 
{ella adaivu kedugalam vdradaidattu 1. 10). What the particular 
danger was to which the children and harem of the late king 
w’ould have been exposed had they remained at Ayirattaji is by 
no means clear. 

^ We now come to the part of the inscription directly bearing 
on Raj5dhiraja’s accession (11. 10 — 14). This part begins with 

the phrase iva periyadevar elimdaruli ndlile , and 

in spite of the gaps, the phrase is a clear warning that, having 
so far dealt with what happened on the death of Riljarajadeva, 
the inscription now proceeds to narrate something which took 
place in his life-time. There were no sons fit for succession — 
tiru ablmckattukkii uriya pillaigal inriye i(ruk)kirapa#vyai 
parttu — and something had to be done : enquiries were made into 
the rights of possible claimants — (a)nndlile kdriyam irundapafyi 
vi(cdranai)'*' 1 scydu, and in the end, there w r as chosen for the 

145 “ The body of armed men and women employed in the inner 
apartments of the palace.” V. V. 

i««“Class of officers who first receive the royal commands and com- 
municate them to others for execution.” V. V. 

l4r V. Y. suggests vHwappctd)ieydu» 



THE CO^AS 



succession a grandson of Vikramacola, Edrilipperumal, the son 
of Neri-uduiya-perumal , of Gangai-konda-solapuram. Apparently 

Pallavarayar was commissioned to fetch the heir-apparent so 
chosen to Rajarajas presence and to install him in his new place ; 
four years later, he was anointed under the name Rajadhiraja- 
deva with the consent of the council of officers ( udan kuttam) 
and the nddu. A distinction is made between mandai kavippittu 
(]. 12) and tins abhisekam pan wuvittu (1. 13), two ceremonies 
in which Pallavarayar played a part. EdirilipperumS] was a 
grandson of Vikramacola perhaps by a daughter, otherwise 
unknown. 


The rest of the inscription may be briefly dealt with before 
taking up the chronology of the events of Rajarajas reign as 
suggested by it. After Rajadhirajas anointment at the end of his 

four years’ probation, there followed the Pandyan Civil War, and 
Pallavarayar led the Cola forces to victory, and at the end of 
the campaign, lie kept himself ready to cany out the further 
behests of his sovereign, (11. 14 — 21). Then he took ill and died, 
evidently sometime after Rajarajas death already mentioned in 
the record, and Rajadhiraja gave 40 vclis of land, which had 
been the kdni of Pallavarayar and was now made tax-free for 
the benefit of his wives and relations. This was in the 8th year of 
Rctjadhirajadeva*s reign. Among the beneficiaries of this grant, 

ngurea a Rajarajadevan (read as Rajadhirajadeva by Soma- 

friuidara Desikar ) whose relations and children get some land for 
themselves; 1 doubt if this Rajarajadevan can be identified with 
Kajaraja II as has been done (ARE. 1924, II, 21, EL xxi, p. 185 

n. 2). lam inclined to treat him as a relative, otherwise unknown, 
of Pallavarayar. But the fact that the largest share (eight veils ) 
goes to his wife (virimdangal) and her children, and the leading 
part of Pallavarayar in the removal of Rajaraja’s harem and 
children to a safe place support the other view, and it is possible 
that Bajaraja s children were by the daughter of PallavarSyar. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 



Venkoba Rao says : “ There seems to have been great 
opposition, both open and secret, to the coronation of Rajadhi- 
raja from many quarters, against which the minister carefully 
guarded the prince and firmly established him on the throne 
after imprisoning all the suspected enemies.’ ’ {ARE. 1924 II 20). 
All this seems to be reading rather too much into the obscure and 
fragmentary thirteenth line in the record. I agree with Venkoba 
Rao when he says: “unfortunately, the inscription is much 

damaged in certain important portions and leaves much for 
surmise” {ibid). 

To turn to chronology : Rajaraja’s reign began between 
6th April and 11th July A.D. 1146. The latest regnal year 
clearly cited in his inscriptions is 26, and the 26th year must 
have begun alter 6th April, A.D. 1171. Rajadhiraja’s accession 
was between 28th February and 30th March A.D. 1163, so that 
his eighth regnal year covers the period March 1170 to March 
1171. The twenty-sixth year of Iiajaraja did not begin, accord- 
ing to this calculation, until the eighth year of Rajadhiraja had 
closed, and it is difficult to see how to reconcile this with the 
present inscription which states that Rfijaraja died before 
Pallavarayar whose death occurred some time in the 8th year of 

Rajadhiraja. 148 We shall see that the chronology of the 
Pandyan Civil War also requires that the reign of Rajadhi- 
r&ja should be taken to commence somewhat later than was 
determined by Kielhorn. 

Some inscriptions of Rajadhiraja II are known which do 

not work out correctly for the accession date fixed by Kielhorn 
and seem to indicate a later date for the commencement of 
his reign*— 19 of 1913, 571 of 1907, 428 of 1912; see 
Ind. Eph. I ii p. 70 and EL x. pp. 126-7. It should be noted with 
regard to these inscriptions that Sewell’s suggestion that the 

14 8 Tlie position is made worse by 7 of 1893 which implies an interval 
of 15 years between the l(9)th year of R&jar&ja II and the 8th year of 
Itfijadhiraja. SII . iii, p. 207. Perhaps the regnal year of R&jaraja men- 
tioned in this record is 1(1) and not 1(9). 



S>4 


^Hfe CO^AS 


regnal year in 571 of 1907 may be ‘ 15 y is held to be impossible 
by Venkayya, and that 428 of 1912 contains the kadal sulnda 
introduction. These records point to a date somewhere in 1166 
A.D. for Rajadhiraja ’s accession, a date which will fit in with the 
facts to which attention has been drawn above. On the other hand, 
337 of 1914 (Pd. 13S) clearly seems to imply an earlier date than 
Kielhorn s. And there is a record 10 at Punganur which implies 
that one and the same regnal year of this king was described as 
either the twelfth or the fourteenth. 


In regard to copper-plate 23 of 1916-7 which couples 
§. 1091 with the 23rd regnal year of Rajaraja 11, Venkata- 
subbaiya makes the following observations. ‘ * We know that 
ltajaraja II was not alive in A.D. 1169 and that the Co] a country 
was then ruled by Rajadhiraja II. The period of regency was 
probably denoted here (Vengi) as a continuation of Rajaraja's 
reign.' ’ These remarks seem to assume that no records of 
Rajaraja from the Tamil country are known to be dated after 
the accession of Rajadhiraja (1163) ; if this is so, attention may 
be invited to 267 of 1901, 411 of 1909, and 96 of 1920, though it is 
a fact that records of Rajaraja dated alter the 19th year have not 


been traced in the Tamil districts* Moreover no other example 
of the practice postulated by Venkatasubbaiya of a regent or his 
vassals continuing to issue records in the name of a deceased king 
is known in the whole Coja history. There is no evidence for 
the view that Rajadhiraja 11 ruled as regent for KulOttunga 111 
during his minority. 

The exact date when Rajadhiraja was chosen for the 
succession must depend on whether the regnal years of this king 
as counted in his inscriptions included the initial period of four 
years when he was on trial ; seeing that the, title Rajadhiraja is 
said to have been conferred on him only at the time of his anoint- 
ment at the end of four years and that inscriptions dated in the 
second year bear this title, the conclusion may be drawn that the 
period of probation preceded the date of anointment and that the 


**•209 of 1932. 



THE SUCCESSORS OF KULOTTUNGA I A.D. 1120-63 


95 


tale of RajadhirfgVs regnal years did not include this period.' 50 
If this is correct, the first choice must have been made sometime in 
1159 A.D. or 1162 according as we adopt 1163 or 1166 as the 
initial year of Rajadhiraja’s reign. "We have seen that the latter 
is the more likely. Rajaraja himself lived on many years after 
this date. 

It seems quite impossible that Kulottunga III was one of the 
children of Rajaraja said to have been one and two years old at 
the time of his death; for he came to the throne in 1178, within 
six years after Rajaraja’s death, and took an active part in 
the War of Pandyan Succession which had begun while 
Rajaraja was still living. The evidence of the Kulottungankdvai 
and Sankarasolnn uld also points to the same conclusion. Sen 
Tamil iii., pp. 164 ff., contra ARE . 1909 II, 48; 1924 II, 21.; 
El. xxi. p. 186. 


,«V V. points out that 337 of 1914 
Dec. 3, Monday, may be a record of the 


(Pd. 138) giving date A.D. 1162, 
probationary period. 



Chapter XV 

RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA. III 

A.D. 1163—1216 


In the absence of an heir in the direct male line 

„ , Rajadhiraja II, a grandson of Vikrama- 

cola by a daughter, was chosen by 
Rajaraja II as heir-apparent towards the end of his 
reign, and Rajadhiraja reigned as co-regent with 
Rajaraja for about eight years. 1 Rajadhiraja 's 
prasastis are found in three forms, all purely rhetorical 
and of no historical value. The form which begins 
kadal sulnda par mag alum ( mddarum ) and occurs as 
early as the second year 3 was obviously borrowed from 
Rajaraja ’s inscriptions; the other forms are : pii 

maruviya tisaimugatton which appears first in the fifth 
year 3 and was adopted later by Kulottunga III, and 
kadal sulnda parelum,* found in inscriptions of 
the sixth and tenth years from the Tanjore district. 
While the prasastis of the king are thus of no 
use to history, several inscriptions of his reign 
give a fairly detailed account of the incidents of 
the war of Pandyan succession which, on a comparison 
with the story of the war given in the Mahdvamsa, is 
seen to be quite trustworthy. 

accession dates from 28 Feb. — 30 Mar., A.D. 1163, Kieihorn, EL ix, 
p. 211. 

*638 of 1904 (Yr. 2) ; 43 of 1922 (Yr. 3). 

*262 Of 1902. 

*172 of 1908 (Yr. 6); 540 of 1904 (Yr. 10). 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 9 7 


From the re-conquest of the Pandya country by 

Kulottunga I, we hear almost nothing 

P war an CiVl1 a ® a ' Lrs or the fortunes of the 

ancient line of Pandya rulers until we 
reach the reign of Rajadhiraja II. The inscriptions of 
the Pandyas, which may with more or less certainty be 
assigned to this period, show that even after 
Kulottunga ’s southern wars, the Piindyas successfully 
maintained a part of the freedom they had gained from 
the initial difficulties which beset Kulottunga on his 
accession to the Cola throne ; they engraved inscriptions 
of their own with boastful pramstis, a thing which they 
did not or could not do when their country was ruled 
more firmly by the Co] a- Pandya viceroys. They waged 
their own wars without reference to the central power to 
which their allegiance tended to become more and more 
nominal. Parantaka Pandya took part, as we have 
seen, in Yikramacola’s first Kalinga war and attacked 
Telinga Bhima of Kolanu ; but this real subordination 
to Cola suzerainty apparently gave place to a more 
grudging recognition of it in the years that followed 
the death of Kulottunga I, if not towards the end of his 
reign when the Cola power underwent considerable 
curtailment by the loss of Mysore and Vengi. Hardly 
any inscriptions of the Cola monarchs are found in the 
Pandya country proper after the close of Kulottunga ’s 
reign . 5 

Towards the close of the reign of Rajaraja H, some 
years after Rajadhiraja had been chosen for the 

*Only two Inscriptions of VikramacSJa from Sivapuri (Rd.)-< 
47 and 66 of 1929; none of Kuldttunga II and R&jar&ja II; one of 
n&j&dhlraja n from Tirukkajakkwji (Rd.)— 48 of 1916. 

K—13 



98 


THE CO^AS 


succession, a fierce succession dispute broke out in the 
Pandya country, and one of the rival parties appealed 
to the powerful Cingalese ruler Parakramabahu I 
(A.D. 1153-86) and the other to the Cola monarch. The 
war soon resolved itself into a continuation of the old 
struggle between the Cola and Ceylon kingdoms. The 
intercession brought no good to either ; out of the ashes 
of the civil war arose the Pandva power which in its 
renewed strength soon swallowed up both the kingdoms 
which had espoused the rival causes of the protagonists 
in the civil war. 

The early stages of the war are vividly described in 

the Mahuvamsa .* In 1169 A.D., Para- 
Th &cwunT anUa krama Pandya of Madura sent an appeal 

for help against Kulasekhara who was 
investing the city of Madura. Before the Ceylonese 
army sent under Lankapura in response to this appeal 
could reach the mainland, events there had moved 
rather fast. Kulasekhara had captured Madura and 
put an end to the lives of Parakrama, his wife and 
children at a place called Tirimalakke. On hearing 
this Parakramabahu sent word to Lankapura that 
the war should be continued until the kingdom 
of Madura was taken from Kulasekhara and 
bestowed on a scion of the house of Parakrama. 
Lankapura effected a landing on the opposite 
coast in the face of opposition, and advancing by 
way of Ramesvaram, he strongly fortified himself 
at Kundukala, on the tongue of land projecting from 
the mainland into the sea near Ramesvaram. The war 


•CV. ch. 76, v. 76— ch. 77. V. 103. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 9 9 


was marked by savage ill-treatment of the prisoners of 
war, the Tamils who fell into Lankapura ’s hands being 
either impaled or transported to Ceylon to labour at the 
restoration of the Buddhist Viharas of the island that 
had suffered during the Tamil domination. Without en- 
tering into the minute details of the marches and coun- 
ter-marches and the numerous battles of the campaign 
which are of no direct concern to us, we may note that 
Lankapura s task proved more difficult than was anti- 
cipated. Kulasekhara long kept up a brave resistance, 
and Lankapura had to send for reinforcements to 
Ceylon and to placate the local chieftains of the Tamil 
country by means of presents and honours. When he 
learnt that Parakrama’s son Yira Pandya who had 
escaped the massacre of Kulasekhara was living in the 
Malaya (mountain) country, Lankapura sent word to 
him to come and join him at a place not far from 

Madura. Kulasekhara put into the field army after 
army and a fierce war raged in the Ramnad and Madura 
districts, extending on either side to Pudukkottah and 
Tinnevelly. To judge from the length of the struggle and 
the way the Tamil chieftains repeatedly changed sides, 
the cause of Kulasekhara was apparently more popular 
in the Pancjya country, and the support which 
Kulasekhara gained from his uncle in Kongu 7 and 
from the Colas niay be taken also to point in the same 
direction. However that may be, the last stage of the 
war as recorded in the M ah avamsa began with the return 

'336 of 1928, a record of the Kongu-cdla ruler Kuldttunga, furnishes 
striking epigraphical confirmation of this fact mentioned in the MV. It 
also gives some clue to dynastic and political relations in S. India in this 
period. 



ioo 


THE CdfcAS 


of Kulasekhara from the Cola country with a Cola force 
commanded by Pallavarayar and others which he sent 
to Tondi and Pasi. In the battle of Kilenilaya that 
followed, victory was with Lankapura ‘who dyed the 
water of the ocean ruddy with the blood of the foe ’. 8 
Kilenilaya of the Mahuvamsa is doubtless identical 
with the modern Kil-nilai in the Tiruppattur taluq 
of the Ramnad district. After another fight at 
Ponnamaravati in which Kulasekhara was defeated 
and put to flight, Lankapura gave over the government 

of the kingdom to Yira Pandya (whose coronation he 
had ahead c celebrated in accordance with the orders of 
Parakramabahu), introduced the kahapana, the coin of 
Parakramabahu, everywhere, and sent to Ceylon a vast 
amount of booty captured from the Pandya and Cola 
countries. 

This account of the Mahdvamsa is on the face of it 
incomplete. It does not say how Vira Pandya fared, 
or what happened to Kulasekhara, and seems deli- 
berately to avoid stating that Lankapura returned 
to Ceylon . 0 One gains the impression that the 
Ceylonese author has drawn a veil over the ultimate 

failure of the effort after the initial success. 

* - * # * * * * 

That this is the fact becomes dear from a study of 
the Cola inscriptions bearing on the war and from some 

*CV. Ch. 77, v. 85. Geiger (n. 3) doubts the accuracy of this descrip- 
tion apparmtly^because he understands Madhura in v. 83 to mean the city. 

I think it is the kingdom that is meant. Kilenilaya is on the n. border of 
the old F&odyan kingdom in the present Ramnad Dt, and the fight tphicb 
raged over four gavutfis might have extended from this village to the 
sea* We shall see that the C6Ja Inscriptions confirm this view. 

*Cf- Geiger OV. ii, p. 100, n. 1. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 101 


events recorded in the Mahavamsa under the reigns of 
the successors of Parakramabahu I. 


The Arppakkam ( Chingleput Dt. ) inscription 10 
of the fifth year of Rajadhiraja contains the 
earliest epigrapliical account of this war. It says that 

the Ceylon army captured the Pandi- 
mandalam and drove out Raja Kula- 
sekhara from Madura ; the army then proceeded against 
the mmantas of Rajadhiraja, and made war in the 
region of Tondi and Pasi, and won victories which struck 


The C6}a version. 


terror into the hearts of the people in the Solamandalam 
and other tracts (naclus). Edirilisola Sambuvaraya, 
when he heard of these occurrences, became greatly 
concerned about how it was all to end and sought divine 
intercession through Svamidevar, a holy man, whom he 
besought to ward off by prayer, sacrifice and worship 
the invasion of the Cola country by the wicked troops 
from Ceylon and the resulting harm to the Brahmins 
and temples thereof ; Svamidevar said in reply that he 
knew that the Ceylon army had put an end to worship 
in the temple of Ramesvaram and had plundered its 
treasury; he would endeavour by occult means to bring 
down disaster on the enterprise of the invader's who 
were Sivadrohis. With this object he performed p&jd 
for full twenty-eight days, and then came news from 
Pillai . P-allavarayar that the pradhmis including 
Jayadratha and Lankapuri dandandyoka# and the 
entire force from Ceylon had sustained defeat. And 
the Sambuvaraya in his gratitude presented the village 
of Arppakkam to Svamidevar. 


>•20 of 1899. 



102 


'THE CO^iAS 


The Pallavarayanpettai (Tanjore Dt.) inscrip- 
tion 11 of the eighth year is more explicit in its details. 
Like the Atahavamsa, it begins by stating that 
Kulasekhara Pandya was ousted from Madura by the 
advent of the Ceylon army, that thereupon he entered 
the Cola country, and appealed to the Cola monarch for 
help in restoring himself to the Pandyan throne; the 
Cola ruler then ordered that Kulasekhara was to be 
restored to his throne, and that Lankapuri-danda- 
nayaka and others were to be killed and their heads 
nailed to the gates of the city of Madura, the Pandya 
capital. Pallavarayar, who was entrusted with these 
tasks, entertained Kulasekhara suitably during his stay 
in the Cola country, and having with his army, resources 
and zeal, brought about the reconquest of the Pandyan 
kingdom, he carried out his master’s orders to the letter 
by nailing the heads of Lankapuri-dandanayaka and 
others to the gates of Madura. Kulasekhara thereupon 
re-entered Madura, and thus was averted the conversion 
of the Pandyan country into a province of Ceylon 
( pundi-nddu Ila-mddffddapadi pariharittu ) . 

A third inscription dated in the twelfth year, four 
years after the last one , 12 and found in the North Arcot 
district, carries the account of the war a stage further. 
The record is unfortunately much damaged and many 
gaps in it greatly obscure its meaning. This inscrip- 
tion records a gift of land to one Palaiyanur-udaiyan 
Vedavanam - udaiyan Ammaiyappan alias Anpan 
Pallavarayan, and narrates the war in recounting his 

”438 Ot 1924. 

“465 of 1905. 



RAjADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 1 03 

services to the state . 13 After giving a brief account of 

the war up to the restoration of Kulasekhara to the 

throne of Madura, — an account which follows the earlier 

records summarised above and ascribes to Arman 

• • 

Pallavarayan a prominent part in these events, — the 
inscription proceeds to narrate an expedition against 
Ceylon, organized presumably by Annan Pallavarayan. 
He heard that the Singalese king, Parakramabahu, was 
preparing for another attack on the Cola king and his 
protege Kulasekhara and that, with this intent, he was 
concentrating his forces and building ships in Uratturai, 
Pulaicceri, Matottam, Vallikamam, Mattival 14 and 
other places. To counteract this, Annan Pallavarayan, 
acting on behalf of the Cola monarch, employed 
Srivallabha, the nephew ( maru-magcmar ) of the king 
of Ceylon and a claimant to his throne , 15 who had 
already betaken himself to the mainland to make 
common cause with the enemies of Parakramabahu, who 
had kept him out of his rights in Ceylon. The expe- 
dition that was sent with Srivallabha at its head 
captured and destroyed several places in Ceylon, 
including Pulaicceri and Matottam, where Parakrama- 
bahu was gathering his forces ; it seized many elephants 

*•261 of 1925 is another similar gift of land and contains a fragmen- 
tary copy of the same account of the war and is useful in filling some 
gaps. 

1 4 Orattujrai is Kayts on an island to the W. of Jaffna. M&tdttam is 
Mahatittha, Mantotta. Vallikamam is called ValikagSina in the JUT. 
(ch. 83, v. 17) and is about 5 miles S.E. of Manner. M&ttiv&i is perhaps 
the same as Mattuvil, 10 miles east of Jaffna. Venkatasubbaiya, El. xxt 
p. 187, nn. * , * 

18 This prince had once (c. 1154) been taken prisoner by Par&krama* 
bfthu and forced to march in front of his triumphal procession. CV. ch. 72, 
vv. 291, 299. Ceylon was rent by a protracted civil strife before P. suc- 
ceeded ’in uniting the whole of the island under his sway, CV. Ch. 70 — 2. 



THE COLAS 


104 

and set fire to a considerable area extending over twenty 
kadams from east to west and seventy kadams from 
north to south, killing some of the Singalese chieftains 
of the locality and taking others captive. The booty 
captured in the course of the expedition was then duly 
presented to the Cola king by Annan Pallavarayan who 
thus successfully counteracted all the machinations of 
the Ceylonese ruler. 

At this stage events took quite an unexpected turn 

and our inscription records a defection 
a diplomatic f rom the Cola cause on the part of 

revolution* • . , 

Kulasekhara. We can only surmise the 
actual course of affairs. The policy adopted by Annan 
Pallavarayan to defeat the plans of Parakramabahu 
against the rulers of the mainland was to foment civil 
strife in Ceylon by supporting a rival claimant to 
Parakramabahu ’s throne ; Parakramabfihu had had 
enough trouble to meet at the commencement of his 
reign from jSrivallabha’s father, Manabharana, and had 
no desire for another long struggle to retain his throne. 
When hard pressed at home by the activity of 
&rivallabha, Parakramabahu strengthened himself on 
the mainlan d by effecting a sudden revolution in his 
diplomatic position in relation to the Pandyan civil 
war. He recognised that his attempt to support 
Parakrama Pandya’s line and keep Kulasekhara out of 
the Madura throne had not only failed in itself, hut was 
threatening his own position with ruin. He now made 
up his mind not only to recognise Kulasekhara as the 
rightful Papdyan king, but to enter into a close alliance 
with him by sending him lavish presents and thus wean- 



RAJADHJEAJA II AND KULOTTUNOA III A.D. 1163-1216 105 

ing him from his tendency to seek the Cola protection. 
Our inscription roundly asserts that Kulasekhara lost 
all consideration for the good done to him before (by the 
Cola king) and resolved to enter into an alliance with 
the king of Ceylon 16 and to co-operate with him in 
hostilities against the Cola kingdom. In pursuance of 
this plan, he drove to the north of the river Yellaru 
those of the Elagattar 17 and the Marava samantas who 
were loyal to the Cola king and w r ere employed in his 
service, such as Rajaraja Karkudi-maraya and Raja- 
gambhira Anjukottai-nadalvan, and also removed from 
the gates of Madura the heads of the Ceylon generals 
that had been nailed there by the other Pallavarayar 
who had placed Kulasekhara on the Pandyan throne. 
Some letters and presents from Parakramabahu to the 
generals and partisans of Kulasekhara fell into the 
hands of the Co]a generals, and this discovery of 
Kulasekhara ’s treachery brought about a volte face in 
Cola policy. The Cola ruler issued orders to Annan 
Pallavarayan that Yira Pandya, the son of Parakrama 
Pandya, the original ruler of Madura, must be installed 
in Madura and Kulasekhara turned out. This the 
general seems to have effected successfully . 18 An 
inscription from Sambanarkoyil dated in the sixth’ year 

‘•The expression employed is : Ikitt&nn4an sambandam panxiavuvi, 
and this may mean a matrimonial alliance. 

17 “People of Elagam,” perhaps identical with Edagam in the Madura 
Taluq. SII. iii, p. 212, n. 1. The phrases marappa^ai and J Vlagappadai 
may, however, imply two sections of the Papijyan forces; if that be so, 

fijagattar here must also be a reference to the troops, which shows that 
some among them had gone over to the enemy, while the rest remained 
loyal to the suzerain power. 

‘•The general was rewarded by the grant of ten vdlis of iraiyili land 
in Pajaiyantlr. 

K— H 



106 


THE CO^AS 


of the reign of Kulottunga III states that owing to the 
vicissitudes of an invasion, the images of one temple had 
to be removed for safe custody to another temple in the 
eleventh year of the reign of Rajadhiraja II. This 
statement makes it probable that at some stage in the 
war, Kulasekhara and Parakramabahu led an expe- 
dition into the heart of the Co] a country. 

The inscriptions thus show that for a period of 

seven or eight years the attention of 

Sl war. ary ° f the Rajadhiraja was chiefly devoted to the 

conduct of the war in the south. And if 
the interpretation of the records given above is correct, 
towards the end of this period, Rajadhiraja had himself 
to order the deposition of Kulasekhara on whose behalf 
and at whose entreaty he had entered the struggle, 
because Kulasekhara had been found guilty of the 
basest treachery towards the Cola ruler. At the stage 
we have reached in the war, Kulasekhara had lost his 
throne and was in exile, and Vira Pandya, the son of 
Parakrama, had been set up on the throne of Madura, 
by the Cola general, Annan Pallavarayan. And this 
was the position to the end of Rajadhiraja’s reign, 
though after the accession of Kulottunga III there was, 
as we shall see, another turn in the wheel of fortune, and 
Kulasekhara ’s line once more possessed the Pandyan 
throne also with Cola assistance. Rajadhiraja had on 
the whole good reason to be satisfied with the results 
of the campaigns. Parakramabahu ’s designs had been 
totally frustrated and his candidates steadily kept out 
of the Madura kingdom. Repeated expeditions of his 
forces on the mainland had been successfully met and 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 10? 

in spite of temporary victories, the ruler of Ceylon 
had lost heavily in the fighting and his military and 
naval resources had been greatly damaged. The Cola 
king now assumed the surname; “who was pleased to 
take Madura and Ilam, ’ ’ (Madurai yum Ilanium 
kondarulina) . 10 While the capture of the Madura 
kingdom was a fact, the inclusion of Ilam (Ceylon) in 
the title must be understood only as a claim to that 
kingdom like that set up by the English kings to the 
throne of France or as merely indicative of the military 
successes achieved by the Cola ruler against the 
Ceylonese. If we follow the chronology of the 
MaJiavamsa and one set of Rajadhiraja’s inscriptions, 
the events of the war may be placed between say 
A.D. 1169 and 1177. 20 


Extent of Empire. 


That under Rajadhiraja the Cola empire continued 

to retain the same proportions as under 
Rajaraja II may be inferred from the 
provenance of his inscriptions which are found in 
Nellore and Kajahasti and Nandalur. 21 Even a part 
of the Ganga country would seem still to have 
been included in the Cola empire, if the Cola -maharaja 
Ghatti-nulamba Bhujabala-vira Ahomallarasa, des- 
cribed in a Kancipuram inscription 22 as 
the Mahamapdalika of Gangamandala, 
was in fact a feudatory of Rajadhiraja II. An inscrip- 


Titles. 


*•36 of 1006; 731 of 1909 etc. Some records, e.g. 474 of 1906, combine 
the usual pra&asti and this surname. 

3 "See ante , pp. 93-6. 

N. 108, 105 of 1922; 571 of 1907. 

33 48 of 1898. 



108 


THE CO^AS 


tion from Attur 23 in the Tan j ore district i$ issued in the 
name of Tribhuvana-eakravartin Karikalac6ladeva 
who took Madura and Ilam, and obviously the 
inscription belongs to this period; it seems legitimate 
to infer that Karikala was a title of Rajadhiraja II, 
an inference which is confirmed by another inscription 
(from Cidambaram) which couples the names 
Rajadhiraja and Karikala. 2 * A damaged record from 
Tiruvilimilalai, 25 which bears no date, mentions the place 
Komaran Kulottunga-sola-caturvedimangalam in the 
Tiruvalundur-nadu ; the village seems to have been 
named after prince Kulottunga, afterwards Kulot 
tunga III, an inscription of whose reign 28 mentions gifts 
made in the same village as early as the third year of 
Periyadevar, evidently Rajadhiraja II ; the relation of 
Kulottunga III to Rajadhiraja, if any, is not clear. 

Among the officials and feudatories mentioned in 

the records of Rajadhiraja ’s reign, the 
Feudatories. following may be noted. The two most 

prominent were the two Pallavarayars whose successes 
in the Pandyan civil war have already been dealt with in 
detail. The elder Pallavarayar of Karigai-kulattur, 
Tirucci ryambalam-udaiyan Perumanambi, was the 
trusted lieutenant of Rajaraja II and survived him oifiy 

*•129 of 1927. 

”263 of 1913. gee ARE. 1927 II. 27. The Cidambaram inscripUon 
was understood to refer to a grant made in the reign of Kulottunga III 
and the titles Karlkfila and Rajadhiraja were both assigned to that ruler 
in ARE. 1914 II, 17. It seems to be really a case of a grant of Rajadhiraja 
being confirmed by his successor, 263 being the original grant, and 262 
the confirmation in the reign of Kulottunga. Another possibility if that 
262 is a record of Kulottunga II, the ParakSsari title In it being a mistake. 

”420 of 1908. 

*•259 Of 1925. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 109 


long enough to be of service to the widowed queens and 
the young children of Rajaraja after the demise of the 
king. The other Pallavarayar, Palaiyanurudaiyan 
Vedavanamudaiyan Ammaiyappan alias Annan 
Pallavarayan came into prominence early after 
Rajadhiraja’s accession as he is found making a gift 
of land in Tiruvamr in the second year of the reign . 27 
At the death of Perumanambi, it was Annan Pallava- 
rayan who decided the proportion in which the lands 
belonging to the former were to be distributed among 
his relatives . 28 He also endowed three lamps in the 
temple of Tiruvalangadu, N orth Arcot, in the thirteenth 
year of Ra jadhira j a. V edavanamudaiyan Karunakara- 
devan alias Amarakon of Palaiyanur who endowed 
lamps in Tiruvalanjuli and Pattisvaram 29 was perhaps 

a relative of Annan Pallavarayan. 

The Sengenis and Kadavarayas are strongly 
represented in the region of the Arcot districts and 
elsewhere. A certain Sengeni Ammaiyappan Sambuva- 
rayan made an assignment of some local taxes 
and dues to the temple of Tiruppulivanam towards 
the expenses of worship, offerings and repairs in 
the temple; as he could only have made over to the 
temple what was his own or within his power to 
dispose, it is clear that he must have either possessed a 
large assignment himself or been an important official 
of the central government with large powers, devolved 
upon him. This Sambuvaraya was most probably the 

*’638 of 1904. 

*•433 of 1924. 

*•619 of 1902; 270 Of 1927. 



Ho 


the co^as 


same as Edirili-sola who is called Sengeni Ammai- 
yappan Siyan Ammaiyappan in a Kanclpuram record , 30 
and who granted the village of Arppakkam as 
ehabhoga-irmyi U to TJmapati-deva alius Nanasiva- 
deva for his celebrated worship of Siva and prayers to 

him to avert the disasters threatened by the invasion of 
the Ceylon forces . 31 Other chieftains of the same 
dynasty were a Pandi-nadu-kondan ( Conqueror of the 
Pandya country) alias Kanclar Suriyan who built a 
gopura called after him at Tiruvakkarai, and made a 
gift of some land in Sirramur as patticcandam ; 32 a 
Sengeni Ammaiyappan Siyan Pallavandan alias 
Rajanarayana Sambuvarayan who transferred to the 
temple of Munnur the proceeds of some taxes and dues 
for building expenses ; 33 and lastly, a Sengeni Ammai- 
yappan Pandi alias Rajaraja Sambuvarayan who was 
the grandson of Ammaiyappan Kulamanikkam 
Pandinadu-kondar and made a gift of land and houses 
in Mel-&evur in the thirteenth year of the reign . 34 

Among the Malaiyamans we have : Raj a raj a- 

malaiyaman alias Arujala Pemmal, son of Tiruccurak- 
kannappan Malaiyaman, who endowed a lamp at 
Trisulam in the fourth year of the reign ; 35 Rajaraja 
Cediyarayan and Rajaraja Kovalarayan each with a 
number of other surnames and each making gifts in 

,a 7& Ot 1693. 

“20 ot J899. 

“195 ot 1904 ; 202 ot 1902. 

”71 of 1919. 

“222 of 1904. 

”321 Of 1901. 



RAJADHIRA JA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 111 

Kilur in the fifth year } 30 Rajagambhira Cediyarayan 
of Kiliyur f 7 Niranindan alias Sedirayan of Panangudi 
who endowed a lamp at Atti alias Keralantakan allur in 
North Arcot ; 38 Tiruvarangam udaiyan alias Rajadlii- 
raj a-malaiyaray an who figures as the donor of a 
considerable gift in Timppaccur in the tenth year ; 80 
and Kannan Suran alias Akarastira Malaiyaman of an 
inscription from Siddhalingamadam . 40 Other names of 
feudatories and officials that call for notice are: 

Kadandai Sendan Adittan alias Rajaraja Yangara- 
muttaraiyan who made a gift to the temple at Tittagudi 
of five velis of land exempted from kadamai and 
pddikdval from the fifth year of the reign ; 41 Kolan 
Tirukkodungunram-udaiyan alias Nisadarajan of Pon- 

Amaravati ; 42 Arasanarayanan Elisaimogan alias J ana- 
natha Kacciyarayan, evidently of the line of 
Kadavarayas, who is mentioned in a fragmentary record 
from Tiruvadi ; 48 Kunamalaippadi-udaiyan Atkondan 
Gangaikondan alias Pottappiccolan of Yennik-kurram, 
apparently a Telugu chieftain holding an appointment 
in the heart of the Tamil Cola country ; 44 and 

Siddharasa of Nellur, one of whose pradhanis endowed 
half a lamp in the temple at Kalahasti in the twelfth 
year . 46 

••262 of 1902. 

"322 of 1921; 311 of 1921. 

”297 of 1912. 

”150 Of 1930. 

"427 or 1909. 

”26 of 1903. 

”43 of 1916. 

‘•47 A of 1903. 

”621 Of 1902. 

”105 Of 1922. 



112 


THE CO^AS 


From the reign of Rulottunga I, the growth in the 

number of feudatories and the extent 

Ql c°ondftio!is! eu<lal their influence on the administration 

and policy of the central government is 
one of the mosf- striking features of Cola history, and 

for this reason we have sought to collect the names and, 
wherever possible, the achievements of these magnates 
and princelings at the end of each reign. The multi- 
plication of these over-mighty subjects of the king 
naturally weakened the control exercised by his 
government over the general welfare of the country and 
removed considerable areas from its direct purview and 

constituted them into more or less independent jurisdic- 
tions. So long as village-communities and other popular 
organisations, rural and urban, were the only machinery 
of local administration by the side of the central 
government, the latter had a Ann hold not only on the 

general administration as a whole but on the manner in 
which the various corporations carried on their affairs. 
It was not to be expected that powerful chieftains, who, 
though in the beginning they might have risen wiih the 
support and favour of the king, subsequently found 
themselves at the head of armed forces, would stand the 
same amount of interference as the humbler popular 
organisations, the assemblies and the guilds. Such 
chieftains often found themselves in possession of con- 
siderable areas of territory allotted to them by the king 
partly in recognition of their past services and partly 
with a view to enabling them to add a contingent of 
soldiers to the forces of the king in times of need. The 
growth in the number of such chieftains had two conse- 
quences. The first was to weaken the prestige of the 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 11$ 

king’s government by increasingly restricting the sphere 
of its effective operation, and thereby to loosen its hold 
even on the rest of the administration. The inscrip- 
tions of the later Cola rulers do not give rise to the same 

impression, as do those of the earlier monarchs, of a 
powerful central government ever active in restraining, 
correcting, advising and guiding the more or less auto- 
nomous local organisations in the various parts of the 
empire. The popular organisations seem to be for the 
most part left to themselves, and when they have 
anything to do with outside authorities, it is generally 
with the local chieftains who have come up in their 
neighbourhood that they have to deal. It is more often 
to them rather than to the king that they begin to look 
for large gifts or the permanent assignment of local 
taxes and dues for charitable purposes. Another con- 
sequence of the new situation was that the local 
chieftains began to enter into political compacts 
calculated to regulate their conduct towards the 
emperor. These compacts seem to have had an 
important r61e in effecting the transition by which the 
class of official nobility, which had at first grown with 
the growth of the Cola empire, converted itself into a 
number of petty local chieftaincies of a hereditary 
character. It is remarkable that the binding power 
of these compacts is often sought to be secured by the 
most fearful imprecations some of which are too shock- 
ing to be reproduced here. The earliest of these 
compacts are those found in the Ramnad district 
towards the close of the reign of Kulottunga I and in 

the beginning of Yikramacdja’s reign. In the forty- 
K— 15 



114 


THE CO^AS 


second year of the reign of Kulottunga I, as we learn 
from an inscription from Sivapuri (Ramnad Dt.), 4fl 
Kandan-Mangalattevan alias Tuvarapati-velan swore 
a vow of alliance and fealty to Sundarattolan Kandan 
alias Rajendrasola Tuvarapati-velan saying : “I, 
Kandan Mangalattevan alias Tuvarapati-velan do 
hereby swear that I shall remain true to (your) life, 
wealth and honour, and that, if I fail, I shall incur the 
sin of him who becomes the husband of his mother and 
of consuming liquor (surd) and beef ( gd-mamsam ).” 
About ten years later, in the same place is registered 
another compact 47 between Rajendrasolan alias 
Nisadarajan and Kandan Sundarattolan alias Tuvara- 
pati-velan by which the former swore fealty to the 
latter in similar terms. Another instance comes from 
North Arcot and belongs to the reign of Rajadhiraja II ; 
an inscription from Madam dated in the eleventh regnal 
year of the king 48 registers a similar compact among 
three chieftains of the Sengeni family^ It will become 
clear presently that under Kulottunga ill this tendency 
became much more general, and there can be no doubt 
that we have here unmistakable evidence of the 
approach of the end. The empire is dissolving into a 
number of warring principalities before the eyes of the 
king, now no longer powerful to enforce his will on 
his vassals who, though they still own allegiance to 
him, generally act very much by themselves and as best 
suits their divergent interests. 

“65 of 1929. 

“55 of 1929. 

“252 Of 1919. 



ttAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 US 

The latest regnal year traced in the inscriptions of 

Rajadhiraja II is sixteen, 40 so that his 
A KXttui£ hi. r eign extended up to A.D. 1179 or 1182 

according as we adopt A.D. 1163 or 1166 
for the commencement of his reign. The inscriptions 
of Kulottunga show that his rule commenced between 
the 6th and 8th day of July, A.D., 1178. 30 It is thus 
clear that Kulottunga III had come to be recognised 
as the next sovereign before the death of Rajadhiraja. 
It has been shown above that Kulottunga could not have 
been one of the tender children of Rajaraja 51 for whose 
protection the Pallavarayar took effective steps at the 

time of Rajaraja’s death. If the assumption is correct 
that Kulottunga is identical with Kumara Kulottunga 
mentioned in the inscriptions of Rajadhiraja II, 52 then 
it would seem that he was not of the direct, line of the 
Imperial Colas any more than his predecessor. The 
Knlottungmi-kdvai 53 gives the pedigree of Kumara- 
kulottunga thus : 

Sangamaraja 


Kumara 

Nallaman Kulottunga Sankarasolan 

There is an uld on Sankarasolan which seems to mention 

• • 

his elder brother under the slightly different name 

“389 of 1921. 

"El. vtil, p. 260— Kielhorn. 

#J 229 of 1917 of the second year of Tribhuvanacakravartin Kulottunga- 
c6lad§va mentions the ‘nineteenth year of Periyad8var Rdjardjad8va\ This 
does not necessarily imply a filial relation as it is employed also of 
R&j&dhirfija II in 37 of 1925 (Yr. 28). 
s 9 Ante, p. 108. 

61 This work is sometimes ascribed to Ottakk&ttan by mistake. Pandit 
R. Kaghava Aiyangar has shown that It is later than the vlds of that poet, 
and contemporary with the &ankar&46lan uld. Sen Tamil , Hi, pp. 164 — 70* 



ii6 


THE CO^A.S 


Kumara-mahidhara. It must be noted, however, that as 
neither the kovai nor the ula, mentions any historical 
events specifically traceable to Kulottunga III of the 
inscriptions , 54 the identification of this king with 
Kumara Kulottunga of literature is still open to doubt. 
There is no means available at present of ascertaining 
the exact relation of Sangamaraja to the Cola line. 


The records of Kulottunga ’s reign are very nume- 
pra tas tis rous, and the chief prasasti that appears 

in many of them begins puyal vdyttu 
(or vdykka ) valam perwga, a formula which is bor- 
rowed from the inscriptions of Rajaraja II and is first 
found in this reign in a record of the third year . 65 
Though at first this form is repeated almost exactly as 


M The author of the Kovai is more keen on identifying his hero with 
Vi$nu and attributing to him the legendary achievements oi that god, than 
on treating him as a human ruler and mentioning the incidents of his 
career. In this respect, this Kovm compares unfavourably with the 
Pan^ikkovaU which furnishes most of the illustrative stanzas in the com- 
mentary to the lr.a%yanar Ahapporul . Even so, attention may be drawn 
to the following expressions of the Kdvai which, by alluding to victories 
against Kongu and Papdya and mentioning specially the kings devotion 
to 6iva, may be taken to support in some measure the identification of 
the hero of the Kovai with Kuldttunga III— especially as there is nothing 
traceable in it against such an identification: 

Kong-dHum vengaik kodiyon (v. 82). 

Pattiyal-urugi naga-parapanai-yettum Kuldttungan (88); 

Maju-vajiyaip-pdyt-tan ifi.ltaru-tirut-ta}&n Kulottungan (103); 

Min poda ven-kaptfa (114); 

Kongd^ak'kuttum gajixx'^n (133) ; 

A4i ninja mlnamufi-Jftpamum-moJiyaiJavi-pugak-koijii-nlnja ven- 
gai-yuyarttdn (170). 

Mlnavar Serarai ven-kapcja vlram viiuk*kaviftar&-navar paijum* 
Kuldttungan (195); 

Tangum-arafiam pir id-onjilad-andac-cd vaga m em-kongumdjaifi jum- 

kumara-Kulottungan ( 270) . 

The mention of 3&vakam (Z&bag) among the countries acknow- 
ledging Kuldttunga’s supremacy deserves to be particularly noted. 

68 165 Of 190 2—SII. iii, 85. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KUL&TTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 H 7 

it occurs in Rajaraja’s reign and furnishes no data for 
the historian, by the ninth year of the reign an account 
of the Pandyan war of Kulottunga is incorporated in 
it , 58 and this account is reproduced in almost all the 
subsequent editions of the prasasti with significant 
variations which will presently be taken up for 
discussion. The other prasastis of the reign, 
less frequently employed and of little historical 
importance, may be more briefly noticed. The 
formulas commencing malar manna polil-elilum and 
pi l mevi maruviya both appear first in records of 
the fifth year ; 57 a record from Magaral, dated 
in the eleventh year, 5 * has the prasasti beginning 
pii mevi valar of Kulottunga II and cannot be distin- 
guished from the inscriptions of that monarch except 
by the Parakcsari title of the sovereign. Some records 
of Kulottunga III begin pa maruviya tisai mugatton, a 
form which first appears in the fifth year and of which 
only the first words are mentioned in a record of the 
seventeenth year . 58 

The inscriptions of Kulottunga very often exhibit, 
besides the prasastis, some descriptive titles of the 
monarch which are a great help in the identification of 
his inscriptions and in the study of the history of the 
reign. In one record 60 of the second year, and more 

*'457 of 1902; 811. iii, 86. The TlrukkoilambOdur inscription (1 of 

1899) has the same form, but Its exact date is uncertain, as yr. 4 mentioned 
in 11. 14 — 15 is obviously not the date of the record. Contra Venkayya, 

ARE. 1899. 

"173 of 1918; 190 of 1901. 

*•315 of 1901. 

”176 of 1908; 818 of 1902. 

"190 Of 1904. 



iis 


TllE CO^AS 


frequently from the fourth year 81 onwards, the phrase 
‘ Maduraiyum Pandiyan mudit-talaiyum kondaruliya/ 
meaning ‘who was pleased to take Madura and the 
crowned head of the Papclya, ’ is employed to distinguish 
the king from his earlier namesakes. This shows that 
the Pandyan campaign of which we get a detailed 
account for the first time in the ninth year, must have 
commenced, if not actually been completed, some years 
earlier. The descriptive title quoted above is revised 
from time to time by the addition of Ilam (Ceylon) in 
the tenth year , 02 Karuvur in the sixteenth , 03 and of 
Kanclpuram in the twenty-fourth year . 01 The city last 
mentioned is not included in many inscriptions; 
Kulottunga is also stated to have celebrated a vlrubhi- 

seka and a vijayabhiseka - .° 5 

The reign of Kulottimga III is a remarkable 

example of the triumph of the personal 
Disruption abilitv of the monarch against the forces 

of disruption that were steadily in- 
creasing in their number and in the intensity of their 
action. Pandyan affairs had not reached a settlement 
when Kulottunga came to the throne ; and much active 
fighting was still needed and though Kulottunga 
succeeded for the best part of his reign in enforcing 
Cola suzerainty over the Pandyan kingdom, it became 


•>24b of 1903. 

«W. N. 85. 

•» 397 Of 1925. 

•‘2 of 1905. 

••First mentioned in tile twenty-sixtn year— 120 of 1912. As this 
record mentions year 3'/, tie earliest reference is In 658 of 1902. (Yr. 29). 
r^UtSy record from KMcI (617 of 1919) seems to mention these 

a bhuekas in yr. 1(3), which may be a mistake for 30, the figures and 
^ being reversed by ft mistake of the engraver. 



RA JADHIR 5 . JA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 119 


clear by the end of his reign that the southern kingdom, 
after its recovery from the effects of the civil strife, was 
being ruled by able and ambitious monarehs who were 
prepared not only to assert their independence of the 
Cola power, but to embark, in their turn, on a career of 
aggressive warfare and territorial aggrandisement. 
We shall see that Kulottunga lived long enough to 
experience the first shock of the newborn imperialism 
of the Pandyas. Elsewhere, the numerous feudatory 
dynasties were preparing to break off from the centre 
when opportunity occurred, and some of them like the 
Siddharasas of Nellore caused no end of anxiety to the 
emperor by their restless activity directed not seldom 
against the central power itself. All the energy and the 
strength of Kulottunga was taken up in counteracting 
the machinations and undoing the mischief resulting 
from the actions of such overgrown vassals. In spite 
of everything, however, until towards the close of the 
reign of Kulottunga, the Cola empire suffered no visible 
curtailment, and the period of his rule marks the last 
great epoch in the history of Cola architecture and art. 
Literature did not fail to get its meed of encourage- 
ment. Kulottunga himself must be counted as the last 
of the great Cola monarehs. Under his weak successor, 
the empire went to pieces and its ruler suffered per- 
sonal humiliation at the hands of one of his feudatories 
who was in alliance with the newly risen power of the 
Pandyas, and it was only the intercession of the 
Hoysala ruler Narasimha that restored the Cola 
monarch to the semblance of sovereignty, though not 
to real power. 



ISO 


THE CtyjAS 


We have seen that Kulasekhara, on whose account 

Wtoiyan war. Rajadhiraja II fought the powerful 

ruler of Ceylon, Parakramabahu I, and 
his protege Vira Pandya, the son of Parakrama Pandya, 

ultimately made liis peace with the Ceylonese king, 
turned against his Cola benefactor, and paid for his 
treachery by being driven out of Madura by Annan 
Pallavarayan who sought out Vira Pandya and restored 
him to the throne of Madura. A solitary inscription 
of Yira Pandya comes from Sucindram ; <IU it begins 
puma dan daiyum jayamadandaiyuin and records a 
gift of seven veils of land to the local temple on the 
occasion of the king’s coronation ; it seems more likely 
that this grant was made by Yira Pandya when he was 
installed by Annan Pallavarayan, rather than on the 
earlier occasion when the Ceylonese generals secured 
for him a temporary hold on Madura. How long Yira 
Pandya occupied the throne can only be sunnised ; there 
is no doubt, however, that in a short time he too succumb 
ed to the blandishments of the king of Ceylon and went 
over to his side. The fact was that the traditional 
alliance among the southern powers — Venad, Pandya 
and Ceylon — against the Cola monarchy was too firmly 
established to be shaken by considerations of gratitude 
for help received at a critical juncture. We shall see 
that Vira Pandya at a later stage sought refuge in 
Kollam when he was driven out of Madura. It will be 
recollected that when Parantaka I extended the Cola 


%% TA8. ii, pp. 18 ft. The record is valuable as showing the partial 
survival of the C6Ja administrative system through all the disturbances 
and rebellions in the South* 



RAjADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 121 


dominion to the south, the conquered ruler of the 
Pandya country, Rajasimha, found sympathy and 
support in Ceylon and Kerala; that the general rela- 
tions of these powers among themselves and towards 
the Colas remained constant in the long interval that 
had elapsed up to the accession of Kulottunga must have 
become clear from the account that has been given in 
the preceding pages. Hence it was that both 
Kulasekhara and Yira Pandya, though they were ready 
to seek Cola assistance against each other, could not 
maintain that friendship after tlieir object was attained, 
and drifted into the diplomatic situation normal to the 
ruler of the Pandyan kingdom. 

The further stages of tlie war as recorded in 

Kulottunga ’s inscriptions, all of them 

K iMcriptona commencing puyal vdyttu valarn peruga, 

may now be briefly summarised. An 
inscription from Cidambaram dated on the 88th day of 
the ninth year 67 records the coronation of the king at his 
accession, and then states that the king despatched an 
army when Vikrama Pandya sought his aid and in the 
campaign that followed, the son of Yira Pandya fell, 68 
Elagam was subdued, and the army of the maravas 
(marappadai) was beaten, while the Singala soldiers 
had their noses cut off and rushed into the sea. 69 Vira 

•’457 of 1902, (SI/. Ill, 86); 1 of 1899 is similar. 

•*1 of 1899 has ‘sons'. Hultzsch translates: ‘the son of Vira P&pflya 
was subdued, ‘811. iii, p. 212 (1. 2) ; but pa$a as applied to men implies loss 

of life. 

••94 of 1918 (yr. 14) has a more picturesque phrasing which includes 
also the Mapava forces : “ &inga\appa$ai marappadai vctfun#alai kadal 
pukkalari vl] [a.** 

K— 16 



122 


THE COJAS 


Pandya was attacked and compelled to turn back; 
Madura and his throne were seized from him and 
handed over to the Pandya (Yikrama) who had sought 
the aid of the conqueror; a pillar of victory was also 
set up. Another inscription, also from Cidambaram, 
dated on the 118th day of the eleventh year, says : 70 

“By a single army, (Kulottunga) had the nose of the son of 
Vira Pandya cut off before he was captured, bestowed on 
Vikrama-Pandya the great city of Kfldal, and returned. After 
this, he took the crowned head of Ylra Pandya who had returned 
to the attack because of the disgrace (of his former defeat), and 
erected a pillar of victory at the end of the fight. 1 * 

Two records from Tirukkadaiyur 71 dated in the 
fifteenth (?) and sixteenth years repeat the events 
recorded in the last preceding inscription in identical 
words and add the following : 

“Having finished the fight, he (Kulottunga) caused the 
best of his (Vlra Pandya ’s) women to enter (his own) velam ; 72 
(he) set liis foot on the crowns of the Tennan (Pandya), who 
had entered the Western Kollam with his relatives as he had no 
(other) refuge, and of the powerful Cera, when they made 
obeisance at his lotus feet; (he) was pleased to confer on the 
Tennavan (Pandya) the sovereignty of the land of Sen-Tamil 
(Madura country) and (its) crown; (he) put on the anklet of 
heroes and raised the banners of heroism and of liberality; (he) 
was pleased to be present when the chief of Kaikayas named his 
son after him (Kulottunga) and gave him many robes; having 
bestowed a living, such as kings seldom got, on the mlnava 
(Pandya) Vlra KSra}a whom he had compelled to turn his back 

"458 Of 1902, (811 ill, 87). 

"254 of 1925; 42 of 1908. 

"This word does not seem to mean 'harem/ but the female part of the 
palace establishment. 42 of 1906 omits this fact. 



R A JADHIR I. JA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 123 


on the battle-field, whose finger he had cut off, and who had since 
surrendered himself into slavery; (he also) gave him to eat by 
his side from vessels given by him .” 73 

A record from Tiruvidaiinarudur, also dated in the 
sixteenth year, 74 states that the warriors of Kulottunga 
began to guard all places in response to the order : 
“ Capture 11am in the South, so that the tennavar 
(southerners — Panclya, Kerala and S ingala ?) may 
come and prostrate themselves, and the head of the 
Sin gala van may be cut off; till the wavy sea (to make a 
causeway).” Then we have an inscription of the 
nineteenth year from Srirangam 73 which repeats the 
incidents of the Pandyan war almost in the same words 
as the Cidambaram inscription of the eleventh year 
stating also that Yira Pandya ’s second attempt to resist 
Kulottunga was made on the field of Nettur, and adds 
that, at the end of the battle, he took into his velam the 
young queen (madakkodi) of the Panclya ruler, and 
proceeds : 

“When the Tennavan (Pandya), who had lost his fortune, 
and the Seralan (Cera) came (to the Cola), bowed (to him) and 
sat down at the foot ol' (his) throne, (he) placed (his) feet on 
the crown of the former, granted (him) land, granted (him) a 
crown, and gave the Pandya permission (to go) ; and to him on 

’•The text relating to Vira Kcra]a, as I read it from t.ie two inscrip- 
tions mentioned above, is: Mlnavandm V\ra-kcra\an ve(nai) — koijujiu viral 
tazittut-tdn animal pwgudal&l tar&dipar pejrd v&lvalittu pakkamirundmina 
parikala-poriccimiatnalgi. The last phrase has apparently the same 
meaning as the corresponding expression in S/7. iii, 88 1. 6, vlz„ 
parikalattil-amudalittu. 

’•288 of 1907. 

"■66 of 1892— S/I. Ill, 88. 



124 


ME CO^AS 


whose flag was seen the bow (the Cera ), 78 he granted a fortune 
which (other) kings could not obtain.” 

The inscription then mentions the defeat of Pandya 
;Yira Kerala, whose finger was cut off and who was 
forced to turn back , 77 and the gifts made to him, as also 
the gift of much treasure, robes, and bejewelled vessels 
to the Pandya who bore the glorious name of ‘ chief of 
the family of the Sun’. From Tiruvorriyur 78 we have 
an inscription of the nineteenth year which says, in the 
midst of much sham history, that Kulottunga eut off 
the heads of Tennavan and Yikkalan ; these statements, 
it is certain, deserve no credence and may be ignored. 
Another record from Tirumanikuli 78 of the twenty- 
first year follows the Srirangam inscription of the 
nineteenth year except that it omits the gifts of land 
and crown to the Pandya and of wealth to the Cera 
when they both sat at the feet of Kulottunga ’s throne 
and he placed his foot on the crown of the Pandya; it 
also adds at the end that Kulottunga adorned with his 
feet the crown of the Ceylonese king (Ilattan) in order 
that it may prosper. 


"This seems to be the real meaning of: ‘ Kodivalangu-villavan ’ which 
Hultzsch translates: 'the Villavan (i.e. the Cera king), who (formerly 
had) distributed crores/ Valangudal means ul&vudal, Tamilc-collagar&di. 
cf. S. K. Aiyangar, S. India and her Muhammadan Invaders, p. 14, n. 3. 

,7 In this inscription the phrase read as f ve(nai) kongu’ and corrected 
into 'venal katydu' by Hultzsch occurs after 'viral faptia’ and not before 
it as in the Tirukkatjaiytir inscriptions noticed before; the Pudukkottah 
records to be noticed later follow the Srirangam reading. The phrase 
* tdnadimai-pugududalar is omitted in the grirangam and Pudukkottah 
records. 

"404 of 1806. 

"170 of 1902. . 



Raj adhir a j a ii and kulottunga m a.d. 1163-1216 i 25 

Lastly, there are two records from the Pudukkottah 
state 80 with a unique form of the prasasti not so far 
traced in any other inscriptions of Kulottunga. From 
one of these records, the date has been lost ; the other 
is dated in the thirty-fourth year. This prasasti 
mentions the Pandyan campaigns of Kulottunga 
at, two points in a manner that clearly implies that 
the facts recorded in the other inscriptions cited 
so far do not take us to the end of the story and 
that there was another expedition some years later. 
Though we must reserve to a later stage a discussion 
of the events recorded in the prasasti but having no 
bearing on Pandyan affairs, it may still be useful 
to give here an analysis of the entire prasasti. 
It opens in the usual manner by recording the 
benevolent effects of the king’s coronation; it then 
records the gilding of parts of the Cidambaram temple, 
the construction of Tribhuvanisvaram, the gilding of 
Rajarajisvaram and the institution of festivals in these 
temples; next follows a brief narration of a northern 
campaign culminating in the recapture of Kanci ; 81 what 
follows, on the subjugation of Vadugu and the annexa- 
tion of .V engimandalam, the shower of gold (in the 
form of gifts) and the entry into Urangai, is 
evidently a record of further details of the 
same campaign not found in other inscriptions. 
Then begins the story of the Pandyan war, narrated 
in almost the same words as those of the Srirangam 

•°163; 166 of PudukkOttai Inscriptions : (Texts). Both the records 
are in a bad state of preservation, and the published text is full of gaps 
and possibly some misreadings. 

51 The words employed here are the same as in SII. iii, 87, 11. 2 — 3. 



THE CO^AS 


1$6 

inscription cited above . 82 Kulottunga is then stated 
to have conquered Ilam (Ceylon), waged a fierce 
war against Kongu, entered Karavur and worn 
the ‘great crown of victory’ ( vijayamamudi ), assum- 
ing the title Sola Kerala. Then he set out to wear 
the ‘ crown of heroism ’ ( vlra-mudi ) , fought 

against the warlike army of Malaya , 83 besieged 
Mattiyur and Kalikkottai, defaced some of the Pandyan 
troops by cutting off their noses and took captive the 
marap-padai and elagap-padai ; lie then surrounded 
Madura with his troops, drove the Pandya, his younger 
brothers and his mother into the forests, demolished the 
coronation mandapa of the Pandyas, and after plough- 
ing its site with asses, sowed kavadi on it, and then wore 
the ‘crown of heroism’ after taking the title of Cola- 
Pandyan. He then put on the anklet of heroes, assumed 
the title Tribhuvanavlra and went on a triumphal inarch 
round the city with the banner of heroism raised aloft ; 
at the end of it, he worshipped the God of Madura , 84 
and presented many fine jewels to the deity. He then 
proclaimed that the name of Pandi-mandalam was 
thenceforth to be Cola-Pandiyan-mandalam, and that 
of Madura was to be Mudit-talai-konda-sola-puram ; he 
then inscribed the name ‘Lord of the Cera and Pandya’ 
(Cera-pandiyan-tambiran) on the mandapa in which he 
had been camping, changed the name of the Pandiyan 
and conferred the title Papdya on the bard {pdnan) 

"Ibid, 88. 11. 3—8. 

99 1 have to omit some obscure expressions at this point. 

#i I must not omit to reproduce the beautiful words of the original 
here: “M&maduraiyai valango^u Tiruv&lav&y uraiyum ten-malark - 



RAjADHIBAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 127 


who celebrated the prowess of his arms that took 
Madura to the discomfiture of the Tennavan (Pandya) , 
He then opened a broad street in his own name for the 
procession of the God of Madura, instituted a new 
festival and stayed to worship the deity during the 
procession (in the new street). He then covered the 
Madura temple with gold so that it resembled a golden 
mountain, and distributed the tribute of gold and 
iraiyili (lands) levied from the country of the Cera 
(and) Pandya among the temples of Cidambaram, 
Tiruvarur and Tribhuvanam. He also planted pillars 
of victory carrying the praise of his arms in every 
direction . 85 He finally restored the kingdom to the 
Pandya together with his regalia and assured him of 
his friendship. 


Three Cam- 
paigns. 


From these records, the Pandyan wars of Kulot- 

tunga are seen to comprise three 
separate campaigns. The first of them 
began at the request of Vikrama Pandya 
and led to the deposition of Vira Pandya and the 
appointment of Vikrama to the throne of Madura. It 
is to be noted that the inscriptions are silent on some 
important points. How did Vira Pandya incur the 
displeasure of Kulottunga? This question has been 
examined above, and an answer has been suggested 
which must be held to be only tentative, till it is 
confirmed by direct evidence. Again, what happened 
to Kulasekhara after his expulsion from Madurai How 


88 An inscription of the thirty-fourth year from Tfrumalavfi<Ji (74 of 
1895) gives yet another variant of the puyal vdyttu introduction which 
describes the achievements of the armies of Kulottunga in the different 
quarters of the world — a description of no value to history. 



128 


THIS CdjiAS 


was Vikrama Pandya related to him f What were the 
circumstances under which Yikrama Pandya persuaded 
Kulottunga to undertake an expedition for aiding him 
against Vira? In the absence of direct testimony, we 
can only assume what seems most probable, viz., that 
Kulasekhara was dead by the time this war began, that 
Yikrama Pandya was some near relative of liis, if not 
his son, who inherited his rights to the Pandvan throne, 
and that he used very well the opportunities offered 
to him by the intrigues of Yira Pandya with the 
natural enemies of the Cola ruler. Though this 
campaign is not described in detail till after the com- 
mencement of the ninth regnal year (.Tune A.D. 1186), 
it is possible that it was actually fought before 
A. D. 1182, the time when the title Maduraiyuiti 
Pandiyan-miidittalaiyum londaruliya began to appear 
regularly in the inscriptions. If that was so, the 
campaign was fought in the last years of Parakrama- 
bahu I of Ceylon, and the S ingala soldiers who fought 

and suffered with Yira Pandya must have been troops 

* 

furnished by that king. The divergent accounts of the 
fate of Vira Pandya ’s son or sons render it difficult to 
decide what, if anything, happened to them in fact. 

When the Cola forces had gone back after installing 
Vikrama Pandya on the throne of Madura, Vira 
Pandya made another effort to retrieve his fortune, and 
this led to the second campaign in which Vira Pandya ’s 
attempt was crushed on the battle-field of Nettur. This 
battle must have taken place before A.D. 1189 when it 
is briefly mentioned, though not by the name, for the 
first time. Later inscriptions embellish the account by 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 129 

the addition of fresh details. The main feature of this 
part of the struggle was the co-operation of the ruler of 
Kera]a with Vira Pandya. After the defeat at Nettur, 
Yira Pandya apparently sought refuge in Quilon 
(Kollam) with the Kerala ruler of Yenful ; but the latter 
had no desire to harbour his dangerous guest for long, 
and they both made up their minds to surrender them- 
selves to Kulottunga and thus put a stop to further 
fighting. Vira Pandya seems on the whole to have been 
treated better than he had a right to expect ; he had to 
eat the humble pie in the open durbar of Kulottunga 
and naturally lost his kingdom and the insignia of 
royalty including the harem; but his life was spared 
and possibly he got some land and other forms 
of wealth suited to his new situation. 80 Who 
the chief of the Kaikayas was who named his son after 
Kulottunga, who the Pandya Yira Kerala and who ‘the 
chief of the family of the Sun’, we seem to have no 
means of determining. Again, though the Tirumani- 
kuli inscription states that Kulottunga placed his foot 
on the crown of the king of Ceylon, this can 
hardly be accepted as true. Of the date of the second 
campaign, we can only say that it must have taken place 
before A.D. 1189; whether it came to an end in the 
life-time of Parakramabahu I of Ceylon who lived to 
1187, or dragged on to the reign of Ni&sankamalla, 
separated from that of Parakramabahu I only by the 
short reign of Mahinda YI, is therefore uncertain; it 
may be noted, however, that Ilam first figures in the 

*°Cf. pa#i-valangi mv4i valangi of 811. iii, 88, 1. .5. 

K— 17 



130 


THE CO^AS 


tenth year (A.D. 1188) 87 among the countries taken by 
Kulottunga and that, in his numerous inscriptions, 
Nissankamalla claims to have led three successful 
expeditions to the Pandya country and to have 
renovated a temple at Ramesvaram. 88 The last claim 
is borne out by a Singalese inscription in Ramesvaram 
engraved on a stone which, according to the inscription 
itself, was the seat ( asma ) on which Nissankamalla 
used to sit witnessing theatrical performances and 
listening to music. The inscription also records that 
the king spent vast treasures in renovating the temple 
which came thereafter to be called Nissankamallesvara. 
The Pandyan expeditions of the Ceylon ruler were not 
by any means so brilliant as these inscriptions make out, 
and this may be the reason for the silence of the 
chronicles on the subject. 80 

The third campaign of Kulottunga in the Pandya 
country is described, as we have seen, in the Pudukkottah 

*'M. N, 85. 

• s CV . II. 128, n. 6. 

•• Ceylon Journal of Science, G. II. pp. 105—6. Also CV. 11, p. 128. 
n. 6. The inscription mentioned above is 90 of 1905 wrongly noted as 
Vaftejuttu and damaged in ARE . 1905. S. Paranavitane, JRA8— Ceylon 
Branch~~vxxl t pp. 384 — 387, postulates three invasions of Ceylon by the 
Cojas before A.D. 1200 on the strength of a statement regarding Kitti in 
the Sinhalese poem 8a$addvat& and the old commentary on it. 

The details of the invasions are given only in the commentary, and it 
may be doubted if, without more evidence, we may connect the rather 
vague statements in the commentary with the equally vague references to 
Ceylon in Kul5ttunga's inscriptions. P. also says: 'It seems there was a 

state of chronic warfare between the COias and Sinhalese from the closing 
years of the reign of Par&kramab&hu I to the end of Polonnaruwa period, 
in which there were invasions and counter-invasions with varying fortune.' 
I doubt if the evidence of the CV . can support this statement; there was 
strife in Ceylon and one party or other always sought and gained aid, 
perhaps mercenary, from the continent. Anlkftnga, Lokissara, and M&gha 
himself came to Ceylon with armies recruited on the mainland. 



JtAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 131 

records dated in the thirty-fourth year of the reign. 
This inscription states definitely that after celebrating 
a V i jayabhiseka in Karuvur, Kulottunga started on 
an expedition against the Madura country in order to 
wear the crown of heroism, that is, to celebrate a 
Vlrabhiseka. If account is taken also of the fact that 
the Vi jay a- and VIrabhisekas seem to be mentioned 
first only about the twenty-ninth regnal year, we may 
not be far wrong in assigning some date about A.D. 1205 
to this campaign. If this is correct, the expedition must 
have been directed against Jatavarman Kulasekhara 
who came to the throne in A.D. 1190, and was the first 
great ruler of the period of Pandyan revival that 
followed the close of the Civil War in which Rajadhi- 
raja II and Kulottunga III had espoused the cause of 
one or the other of the rival claimants to the throne. 
It seems probable that Kulasekhara was the son and 
successor of Vikrama Pandya who had been supported 
by Kulottunga. His inscriptions are found in the 
Madura, Ramnad and Tinnevelly districts. 00 They 
contain elaborate prasastis, one of which sets up the 
proud claim that before the Pandyan fish, the fierce 
tiger of the Co]a and the bow of the Cera hid themselves 
(in fear). This claim and the desire of Kulottunga 
for a Vlrabhiseka after his Vijayabhiseka at Karuvur 
are the only indications that remain of the probable 
causes of the war between Kulasekhara and Kulot- 
tunga III ; the inscriptions of the former ruler do not 
mention the war or any of its incidents. We may not 
accept literally everything mentioned in the inscriptions 

•OPK., pp. 142—3, 



132 


THE COJ.AS 


of Kulottunga ; but there is no doubt that Kulasekhara 
paid a heavy penalty for his contumacy. As the war 
ends with the restoration of Kulasekhara, the success of 
Kulottunga was certainly not so absolute, and the 
statement that the Pandyan ruler and his relatives " 1 
sought refuge in the forests is mere rhetoric. The sieges 
of Mattiyur and Kalikkottai — places not yet identified — 
the defeat of the army of the Maravas and the specific 
act of vandalism, the demolition of the coronation-hall 
of the Pandyas, may well be accepted as facts. This 
harshness on the part of Kulottunga proves his 
consciousness of the increasing weakness of his own 
position in contrast to the growing strength of the 
power of the Pandyas. It also accounts for the retalia- 
tion that followed some years later when Maravarman 
tSundara Pandya, who must have suffered along with 
his brother on the occasion of Kulottunga ’s invasion, 
assumed the role of aggressor and carried fil e and sword 
into the Cola country, and performed a Virabhiseka in 
the coronation hall of the Colas at Ayirattali alias 
Mudigondasbia-puram."- 


The wars waged m the north by Kulottunga are 

mentioned for the first time in the 
Srirangam inscription of the nineteenth 
year in the following terms: 


Wars in the 
North. 


91 Note that younger brothers are specially mentioned among these; 
I have pointed out elsewhere, PK. t pp. 143 — 4, that M&favarman Sundara 

P&p<Jya, the successor of Jat Kulasekhara, was his younger brother. 

9 2 Among Kuldttunga Ill's Inscriptions from the P&pgya country may 
be: two from Tirukk&l&kkudi (Rd) — 39 and 40 of 1916 (Yr. 14) , 
one from Tinnevelly, 38 of 1927 (Yr. 18), one from CaturvSdi-mangalam 
(Rd) — 311 of 1928 (Yr. 21), and one from T€nhr (Md)— 606 of 1926 
(Yr. 39). 



R AJADHIR A J A II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 133 

‘‘(He) despatched matehless elephants, performed heroic 
deeds, prostrated to the ground the Kings of the North, entered 
Kacci when (his) anger abated, and levied tribute from all the 
kings there.” 

The Pudukkottah inscriptions, dated more than ten 
years later, add the following : 

“having subdued the Vadugu (Telugus) who were fierce in 
war and (thus) brought Vengai-mandalani under his sway, he 
was pleased to shower gold and enter the golden city of Urangai. ’ ’ 

The incidents thus recorded in Kulottunga ’s 

inscriptions cannot be understood with- 
P °t!on& coudl out a brief resume of the political 

changes that were taking place outside 
the Cola Kingdom. Towards the close of the life of 
Rajaraja II, the Velanandu kings felt themselves equal 
to the task of asserting and maintaining their indepen- 
dence against their Calukya-Cola suzerains. This was 
the period when the Kakatiyas were coming up in the 
north, while in the west the Calukyas, having suffered 
a defeat from Kakatlya Prola, were thrown into the 
shade by the usurpation of Bijjala. The consequent 
weakness of the W. Calukya kingdom gave the occasion 
for the Hoysalas to rise to the rank of an independent 
power; at the same time the Telugu-Codas and the 
Velanandu rulers, who had till then been either 
subordinate to the Calukyas or had lived in fear of them 
and therefore in subordinate alliance with the Colas, 
breathed more freely and soon began to entertain plans 
of aggrandisement. It is remarkable that no inscrip- 
tions of Rajadhiraja II have been found in Nellore or 
the Circars. And it appears that perhaps Gonka II at 



134 


THE CO^AS 


the close of his reign, and certainly his son Rajendra- 
eoda, assumed the titles and insignia of independent 
status . 03 In fact with the close of Rajaraja’s reign 
we have come to that interval in the history of the 
Telugu country in which the Cola power was withdrawn, 
and the Kakatlya power had not yet taken its place — a 
period of about a generation in which many minor 
dynasties like the Kotas, Cagis, Konas and others 
divide the country and owe no allegiance to a 
common power. About the same time the Telugu-Codas 
rise into prominence farther south in the dis- 
tricts of Nellore, Cuddapah, Chittoor, North Arcot and 
Chingleput, and it is to them that the Colas lost 
Kanclpuram and from them that Kulottunga III 
recovered the city. 


The history of the Telugu-Codas of this period 

Teiugu C 5 <ja 3 . presents some difficult problems of 

chronology and genealogy, and though 
there is no lack of evidence, epigraphical and literary, 
attesting their power and importance, all attempts to 
evolve a consistent history of the dynasties that com- 
prise this group of kings have met only with limited 
success . 04 All these rulers called themselves Codas 
and their sway extended over a considerable portion of 
the Telugu country; all of them claimed io be 
descended from Karikala and to come of the solar race 
and Kasyapa gotra. The presence of members of these 
dynasties as feudatories of Kulottunga I and his succes- 
sor's in different parts of the Telugu country has been 


••49 Of 1909; 670 of 1920; ARE. 1921. II, 64. 
t4 M. xxxviii, pp. 7—10; 1 V/. pp. 1430 If* 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 135 


indicated in the enumeration of the feudatories men- 
tioned in the inscriptions of each reign. We have now 
to trace in some detail the relations between the Nellore 
branch of the Telugu Codas and Kulottunga III in order 
to explain the necessity for Kulottunga ’s recovery of 
Kaiicipuram. 

The genealogy of the family starts with two 
shadowy figures. The first of them was Madhurantaka 
Pottappi Cola, so called because he is said to have 
conquered Madura and founded Pottapi, which has 
been identified with a village of the same name in the 
Pullampet Taluq of the Cuddapah district. 95 The 
other king was Telugu Yidya, who erected a pillar of 
victory with a Caruda on its top at a place called 
Ujjapuri. The historical part begins with Beta, the 
feudatory of Vikramaeola. 96 Beta’s son was Erasiddhi 
who had in his turn three sons ; Nallasiddha alias 
Manmasiddha, 97 Beta and Tammusiddha. Some inscrip- 
tions 98 of Tammusiddha state that the younger Beta 
had no mind to rul e and that, on the death 
of Manmasiddha, he gave up his rights in favour of his 
younger brother Tammusiddha who crowned himself at 

Nellore in 6. 1127 or a little before that date on the 

•• EI . vli, p. 121, n. 5; ARE. 1908 II 79. 

*•583 of 1907. 

*’578 of 1907 says that Nallasiddha was the son of Eyasiddha; other 
inscriptions call the eldest son Manmasiddhi. (EI. vii, pp. 153 ff.) Hence 
the identity of Manmasiddha and Nallasiddha may be accepted pace 
Venkayya, IA, xxxviii, p. 10, n. 56. Cf. Sewell, HI 81, p. 130, n. 

•*104 of 1892; 35 of 1893; 407, 408 of 1896— all in EI. vii ed. Liiders. 

99 EI, vii, p. 155. 



136 


THE CS^AS 


other hand, another inscription from Kavali, dated 

►§. 1129, 100 omits all mention of the younger Beta, and 

states that while Nallasiddha 101 was the crowned king 
( abhisikta ), his younger brother, Tammusiddha, 

was ruling the kingdom by his grace — tat katdksd- 
deva raj if am karoti. It is therefore difficult to say 
whether Tammusiddha ruled only after Manma’s 
death, or conjointly with him. A review of the inscrip- 
tions of Kulottunga III which mention the kings of this 
line will show that the Kavali inscription seems to be 
nearer the truth; it will also bring out clearly the 
relations in which these kings stood to Kulottunga in 
the different stages of his reign. 1 ''- 

•••.vr. KV. 39. 

101 Venkayya would read Manmasiddha here, I A. xxxviil, p. 10, n . 56. 

102 Sewell has suggested that Beta II was Nallasiddha. HIKI. p. 395. 
But the number of Nallasiddha’s inscriptions and their provenance, 
together with the claim of laying tribute from Katie! (483 of 1906; 
NI . K. 36, G. 1), imply such an active life for Nallasiddha as to falsify 
completely the statement in the Tammusiddhi inscriptions regarding 
Beta’s exclusive devotion to religious austerities. On the other hand, 
If we identify Manmasiddha with Nallasiddha, the other statement 
in the Tammusiddhi records, that Manma was dead in A.D. 1205 
must be declared to be wrong. And it must be acknowledged 
that the Kavali inscription (KV. 39) mentions only Nallasiddha 
(Venkayya would read Manmasiddha here, and if this is correct., it 
directly contradicts the Tammusiddhi records) and Tammusiddha, and 

states that though the former was the anointed sovereign, still Tammu- 
siddhi carried on the affairs of state by his grace, and thus supports Sewell’s 
suggestion. But if BSta was Nallasiddha, and was anointed after Manma’s 
demise, who was the author of the Nallasiddha inscriptions, of which there 
are several, dating from A.D. 1192, if not earlier, some of which doubtless 
precede the death of Manma, c. A.D. 1205? There seems to be no means of 
reconciling all the statements in the Tammusiddhi records with the data 
furnished by the Nallasiddha records. It must be noted also that NI. G. 86, 
dated A.D. 1214, mentions B&caladevi, the queen of Manmasiddha, in a 
manner that implies that Manma was still alive. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 137 

In the ninth year of Kulottunga III, A.D. 1187, 

Nallasiddharasa, the ruler of Nellore 
acknowledges the suzerainty of 
Kulottunga III. 103 Three years later, 
A.D. 1190, a Siddhi, called also Madhurantaka 
Pottappic-cola, makes a gift to the temple at Nellore, 
citing the twelfth regnal year of his Cola overlord, 
Kulottunga. 104 Then we have a number of gifts, 
registered in the name of Nungama, the queen of 
Nallasiddha, to the temples at Timppalaivanam 
(Chingleput), Kalahasti (Chittoor), and Nandalur 
(Cuddapah) ,* these records are dated in the eighteenth, 
nineteenth and twenty-fourth regnal years of Kulot- 
tunga III. 105 It may be noted in passing that a 
record of Kulottunga himself, dated in liis nineteenth 
year, is found in the town of Nellore. 106 In another 
inscription from Nandalur, 107 Nallansiddlia, the son of 
Madhurantaka Pottapicrcola Eramasiddlia, acknow- 
ledges the overlordship of Kulottunga in his twenty- 
sixth year, A.D. 1204. The latest record in which 

1 03 A7. N. 85. Venkayya says rightly that the inscription is mutilated 
and the date is lost. JA. xxxviii, p. 10, n. 58. But the ‘paddvadu* with 
which the second line begins, and the dates in the other inscriptions cited 
above, make it probable that the regnal year is the ninth of Kulottunga 
though it might also be the nineteenth or twenty-ninth. However that may 
be, it is not easy to accept Venkayya’s statement: 'As the former (Nalla- 
siddha) appears to have been a contemporary of Kulottunga III from his 
27th to 35th year, it is clear that he must have come after Tammusiddhi,* 
when there is no mention of Tammusiddhi earlier than §. 1127 i.e. roughly 
the 27th year of Kulottunga III, while Nallasiddhi figures in many earlier 
inscriptions. 

104 N/, N. 40. Venkayya thinks that the name of the Nellore king was 
Manmasiddha (ibid. n. 54). This is very likely; for, seeing that Tammu- 
slddha is invariably so styled in Sanskrit, the Siddha of the Sanskrit part 
of N. 40 may be the elder of the Siddha brothers. 

10B 317 of 1929; 198 of 1892; 601 of 1907. 

,0 *197 of 1894. 

10, 578 of 1907. 

K— 18 



138 


THE CO^AS 


Nallasiddha recognises Kulottunga’s suzerainty is 
dated nine years later, A.D. 1213. 108 But in the 
interval between 1204 and 1213, we have two records 
of his brother Tammusiddlia 100 from the Nellore and 
Chingleput districts, one of his son Betarasa 110 at 
Kancipuram ; another from Nandalur of probably the 
same prince or another, who is here called Tirukkalatti- 
deva, the Tikkanrpa of literature, and who makes an 
endowment for the benefit of his father Manuma- 
sittarasan and of (alias ?) Nallasiddha; 111 and in all 
these inscriptions, the princes concerned take good care 
to define in an unmistakable manner their vassal posi- 
tion in relation to Kulottunga. And this relation is 
continued almost up to the end of Kulottunga ’s reign 
by another record of the Tirukkalattideva mentioned 
above 112 dated in the 36th year of Kulottunga, and yet 
another 113 from Tiruvorriyur, dated two years later 
and mentioning an agent of Sittarasan in that place. 


This survey of the relations between the Telugu- 
Codas and Kulottunga throughout his reign shows 

Kulottunga’s clearly that the Telugu-Codas did not 

work in the once find themselves strong enough to 

North. ° 

defy Kulottunga for any length of time. 
And the statement in the Siirangam epigraph that 
‘Kulottunga entered Kanci with his anger abated’ shows 
that the campaign was of the nature of a punitive 


J< " NI . A. 18. Another similar inscription (205 of 1894) Is dated 
A.D. 1209 (Yr. 31). 

“’195 Of 1894* 120 Of 1930. 

10 456 of 1919,’ cf. NI. G. 76 (Yr. 27 of Kulottunga III) which says that 
Betarasa was the son of Nallasiddha. 

”582 of 1907; NI. N. 101. 

R. 8. 

”201 of 1912. 



RA JADHIR A.JA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 139 


expedition directed against vassals who had raised the 
standard of revolt. The Cola supremacy was certainly 
still maintained in its full vigour up to Cuddapah and 
Nellore at the time of Kulottunga ’s accession. 114 And, 
except for the short interlude now engaging our 
attention, Kulottunga ’s inscription do not give a 
contrary impression. There were many indications, 
to which we have drawn attention in the course of the 
narrative, that the feudatories of the empire were 
increasing in their strength and that the moment the 
central government passed into incompetent hands, the 
empire would go to pieces. But Kulottunga III was by no 
means a weak ruler and on the whole he succeeded, in 
the midst of many troubles, in maintaining the integrity 
of his inheritance. The temporary loss of Kancipuram 
in this reign and the need that arose for recovering it 
after a fight were the first clear indications of what was 
coming in the future. 

There are some inscriptions of Nallasiddha which 
seem to throw some light on the period when he declared 
independence, but as often happens in Telugu Cola 
history, the evidence of these records raises more 
questions than it helps us to answer. The earliest of 
these inscriptions is a Kanarese record dated &. 1114 
(A.D. 1192-3) and describes the ruler as Bhujabalavlra 
Nalasiddhanadeva Cola Maharaja ruling at Vallura- 
pura, already familiar to us as the capital of Maharaja- 
padi 7000 and eight miles to the N. W. of Cuddapah. 
This chieftain boasts that he levied tribute from 

"UM. 1906, II, 19; 671 of 1907; 195 of 1892; NI. N. 85, etc. 



140 


THE COt-AS 


Kanci . 115 Except the fact of Kulottunga undertaking 
a campaign which he closed by entering Kanci in force, 
there is no evidence in support of this claim of the 
Telugu Coda chieftain. And here we should not omit to 
notice that in the inscriptions of Tammusiddhi, the con- 
quest of Kanci is ascribed, though only by a metaphor, 1 1B 
to his uncle, an earlier fs allasiddha, the brother of 
Erasiddlia. Perhaps this claim on the part of Naila- 
siddlia to have levied tribute from Kanci implies 
only that for some time he stopped the usual tribute 
to the Cola monarch and was still left in undisturbed 
possession of Kanci. However that may be, Kalla- 


110 483 of 1900. Yenkayya was inclined to distinguish between the 
Bhujabaiavlra Nallasiddhamuleva Cola Alalia raja of this inscription and 

Nallasiddha, the son of Erasiddha {l A. xxxviii, p. 10). The former is 
represented also by other Inscriptions from the Nellore area. j\7. G. 1 is 

dated S. 1.05, which may be 1105, (A.D. 1183) and contains the expres- 
sion kappa m kuuna — KV # 13 also mentioning the levying of 

tribute from Kanci is dated S. 1136, and li. 36 with the same titles as 
483 of 1906 is dated three years later, A.D. 1217. The Bhujabaiavlra 
records are few and extend over practically the whole of Kulottunga'e 
reign; 1 think that Nallasiddha, the son of Eyasiddlia, is himself the 
author of these records the titles in which are indicative of his claim to 
Independence. Such pretentious records could not be issued every day 
and were published whenever, in the estimate of Nallasiddha, Kulottunga 
was too preoccupied to notice his action. Some such assumption would 
explain the facts so far known. But this means, once more, that we set 
aside the testimony of the Tammusiddhi records on the death of the 

eldest son of Ejrasiddha. If these assumptions are correct, we may distin- 
guish two periods when Nallasiddha found it possible to act like an inde- 
pendent king; (1) A.D. 1183-1192, when Kulottunga was engaged in the 
Pap4yan campaigns, (2) from A.D. 1214 towards the close of Kulottunga’s 
reign when that monarch was, as we shall see, once more drawn into 
an encounter with the Papayas. It may be noted that in this second 
period, we get records of a Bhujabala\ira En*usiddha ( NL A. 38, K. 38, 
G. 59, G. 58) who rules in the early years of R&jaraja III, and like Nalla- 
siddha, sometimes acknowledges the Cola suzerainty and sometimes does 
not. Was this Eyyasiddha the son of Nallasiddha? There is a record In 
TiruppukkujU (Ch.), 192 of 1916, of the fifteenth year of a Nallasiddharasa 
of the family of Mukkapfi KafluveUi- It is engraved in very faulty 
language and gives the usual Pallava titles. Its date and relation, if any, 
to the Telugu-C6<Ja Nallasiddha cannot be determined. 

u *EI, vii, p. 150 — dik dakpind fja]itarK<iflcigw^d babhfiva (1. 17). 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 14l 


siddha’s career as an independent ruler was soon cut 
short by Kulottunga’s occupation of Kahcl about 
A.D. 1196, and the success of Kulottunga’s enterprise is 
attested not only by his inscriptions Avhich state that he 
entered Kanci with his anger abated, but by the series 
of dated inscriptions of Nallasiddha which have been 
cited above and are dated in the regnal years of 
Kulottunga III. 

For the rest of his reign, Kulottunga had no trouble 
from the Telugu Codas, though in the last few years, 
when the Cola monarch had to meet a powerful enemy 
in Maravarman Sundara Pandya, they seem to have 
made another and a more successful effort to assert their 
independence. But Kulottunga is seen lighting once 
more in the north sometime about A.D. 1208. In this 
campaign he claims to have subdued the fierce Vadugas 
(Telugas), established his supremacy over Vengi and 
entered Urangai. Who were the fierce Vadugas and 
where was Urangai '? Is there any reason to suppose 
that Vengi was regained for the Cola empire by 
Kulottunga even for a short while ? In the absence of a 
single Cola record of this period to the north of Nellore, 
it is not difficult to answer the last question in the 
negative. And if we recall the fact that the power of 
the Kakatlyas had been growing for some time and 
spreading over the ancient kingdom of Vengi, imposing 
a new suzerainty over the chieftaincies that had 
emerged there after the withdrawal of Cola power from 
the region, and that the greatest monarch of this line, 
Ganapati, had come to the throne by A.D. 1199, the most 
natural way of interpreting Kulottunga’s claim seems to 



142 


THE CO^AS 


be to suppose that, he warred with the Kakatlya ruler 
and entered Warangal, his capital, sometimes called 
Orungallu 117 a name which is easily Tamilised into 
Urangni. But of such a war ending so favourably for 
the Cola monarch, we have no indications except the 
vague statements of the two Pudukkottah records. No 
details of this campaign are forthcoming, and the Cola 
entry into W arangal, if that is the real meaning of these 
inscriptions, must be held to be a case of fabrication. 
In the present state of the evidence, we could not even 
say if there was any basis in fact for the tall claims set 
up on behalf of the Cola monarch hi the records of his 
reign. 

The campaign against Kongu culminating in the 

Karuvur triumphal entry into Karuvur and the 

celebration of the V ijayabhiseka in that 

city constitute another obscure episode of the reign. 
The entry into Karuvur is, as we have seen, mentioned 
for the first time in the sixteenth year of the reign, 11 s 
and Kongu bears the name Vlra-sola-manclalam in a 
•record of the tweny-sixth year. 119 If the Pudukkottah 
inscriptions, the only ones that contain a direct account 
of this war, may be taken to have arranged the events 
in the order of their occurrence, this campaign may lie 
assigned to the years following the close of the second 
Pandyan war, to the years, say, A.D. 1190 — 1194. The 
Kulottuagm-Kovai also repeatedly mentions the war 

>”163, 169 etc. of 1913. 

IJ *397 of 1925; 18 of 1925 whicli is doubtfully dated (1)5 also 
mentions U. 

11 *227 of 1917. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 143 

against the Cera and Kongu; but neither the inscrip- 
tions nor the poem contain any clue to the causes or the 
incidents of the war. A number of inscriptions of the 
reign are also found in Karuvur. Others are found 
elsewhere in the Kongu country, including Tagadur, 
and in parts of Mysore, and clearly point to a recovery 
of Cola dominion in this quarter, and a partial reversal 
of Ifoysala expansion that began at the end of the 
reign of Kulottunga I. We shall see that the Adigai- 
mans once more acknowledged the Cola suzerainty 
in this reign, and the inscriptions of the Adigaiman 
who styles himself Vidukadalagiya Perumal suggest 
that he might have had a share in the restoration of 
Cola dominion in this quarter. 120 

Towards the end of Kulottunga ’s reign, the 

Pandyan throne .passed to Mara- 
P s?on an lDVa varman Sundara Pandya (1216) , pos- 
sibly after the demise of his brother 
Jatavarman Kulasekhara, and the new ruler lost no 
time in starting a war against the old Cola monarch 
who had, more than ten years before, deeply 
humiliated him and his elder brother in their 
own capital and perhaps also demolished their 
coronation-hall in Madura. For the successes of 
Sundara Pandya against Kulottunga III, we have to 
depend solely on the inscriptions of the former. The 
Cola inscriptions of the period observe a total silence 
which will cause no surprise when it is recollected how 
the inscriptions of the reign of Somesvara I, 
W. Cajukya, omit all reference to the battle of Koppam. 


»*• ARE . 1907 II, 67. 



144 


THE CO^iAS 


But the records of Sundara Pandya are quite specific 
and full. And their account of the misfortunes of the 
Colas is by no means less trustworthy than the record of 
Pandyan defeats in the inscriptions of Kulottunga 
himself. 

In an inscription of the third year 121 (A.D. 
1218-19) of Sundara Pandya, he is described by the 
title : Sonadu valmtgiyarnliya , ‘who was pleased to 
give (back) the Cola country.’ Another inscription 
of his fifteenth year 122 states specifically that he gave a 
crown and Mudik'onda-sola-puram to Kulottunga-Cola. 
Sundara Pandya ’s inscriptions are actually found in the 
Cola country, though none of them seems to fall with- 
in Kulottunga’s reign. 123 But the two inscriptions of 
Sundara Pandya just cited leave no room for doubt that 
the last years of Kulottunga turned out disastrously for 
him and that in his old age, he had to taste the bitter 
fruit of the Pandyan policy of his earlier years. We 
must now let the prasasti of Maravarman Sundara 
Pandya I describe the course of events : 

“In order that the authority of the tiger (seal) might recede 
to the land of Ponni (Cola country) and that of the carf> might 
gain the upper hand in the land of Kanni (Pandya country), 
(he) spread (over the land) horses and elephants, fierce (in 
war), and consigned to the red flames (of fire) (the cities of) 
Tanjai and Urandai; destroyed the excellence of the crystal 
water in the wells and rivers, so that the Jcdvi and nilam 
(flowers) lost their beauty; razed (to the ground) many pavilions, 
high ramparts, great enclosures, towers, theatres, palaces, man- 
sions and mandapas>' drew tears in streams from the eyes of the 

>”322 Of 1928. 

*■* 9 of 1926. ARE. 1926, II, 32; 1928, II, 18. Contra PK. pp. 152, n. 1. 
i,f PK. ibid. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KTJLOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 145 

women belonging to the kings who did not oome to make their 
submission; ploughed (the enemy country) with asses and sowed 

kavadi (coarse millet) ; fought the Sembiyan (Cola) till his anger 
abated, and drove him into the wilderness; seized (his) crown 
of fine gold, and was pleased to give it to the bard (pdnan) ; 124 
spread his fame by performing a virdbhiseka in the coronation 
hall of the Cola Valava at Ayirattali, which was too good for verse 
and had a golden enclosure which touched the sky (traversed by) 
the Sun; mounted the strong rutting elephant which returned 
each day after plucking the fearful heads of enemy kings ; accom- 
panied only by his fair arms and (his) sharp disc which abolished 
common (ownership) of the whole earth surrounded by the 
water (ocean), he entered the sacred precincts of the divine 
Puliyur, where dwelt the Brahmins whose knowledge of the excel- 
lent Veda was free from doubts, and (there) rejoiced in his heart 
at the sight of the sacred form of the (god) who, with the goddess 
on his side, so danced that the golden hall increased in lustre, and 
made obeisance to the flower-like red feet, unattained alike by 
Brahma (seated) on the beautiful flower and Visnu (wearing) the 
cool basil ; and seated in the shining crystal mandapa, resembling 
the high Meru, the support of the world, brought and fixed in Pon- 
Amaravati surrounded by lotus ponds, in which the humming of 
. bees roused from their sleep swans with curved wings, he invited 
(the Cola) saying (that he would) restore (to him) the Cola land 
rich in gardens and fields, and the garland and crown he had 
lost; the Valava, who had got beyond the Valagiri after he had 
lost (his) high estate, now entered with his relatives, presented 
his son (to the Pandya) saying: ‘Your name \ and prostrated 
himself, a suppliant beneath the victorious throne; (then the 
Pandya) made a gift (to the Cola) with water which cooled the 
heat caused by his earlier loss, and sent him back after restoring 
to him what he had once lost, viz., the title of Colapati and the 
old city, together with a (royal) letter {timmugam) marked by 
the beautiful carp which shone by being worshipped by the kings 
of the sea-girt earth and (setting forth that it was) the agreement 

124 Cf. the grant of the title ‘P§,n<Jya’ to a bard by Kul5ttunga, 
ante p. 126. See also 481 and 482 of 1908 on a Sundara Papaya's grant of 
the C5}a country to the B&pa-pati, 

K— 19 



146 


THE CO^AS 


witnessing for all time the restoration of the wide land at an 
auspicious hour (?) ’’. 


The main incidents of the campaign were thus an 
invasion by Sundara Pandya of the Cola country 
reaching as far north as Cidambaram and marked by 
considerable damage to life and property along the 
route of the march ; the inability of Kulottunga to resist 
the advance of the Pandya ruler and his seeking refuge 
in flight; finally, the restoration, possibly after some 
negotiations, of the kingdom and crown to Kulottunga 
on condition that he acknowledged Sundara Pandya as 
suzerain. The tables were thus completely turned; in 
almost evei*y detail, Sundara Pandya followed the 
example set by Kulottunga during his third campaign 
against the Pandya country. At one stroke the Pandya 
king not only destroyed the overlordship of the Cola 
and declared his own independence, but actually com- 
pelled his quondam superior to do homage to him in 
turn. This was in 1216-17. We shall see later that 
the attempt of the Cola ruler to regain his independence 
led to another Pandyan invasion with more disastrous 
results. 


Results of the 
Invasion. 


Now why did the Pandya, if he was so successful 

against the Cola as his inscriptions 
assert, not annex the Cola country to his 
kingdom ? One would expect that after 
all that they had suffered from the Co]as since the days 
of Rajaraja I, if not earlier, the Pandyas, when they 
got the chance, would put a final end to the power of 
their ancient rivals. But that is not the way of Indian 
monarchy. In its code, respect for an ancient and 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 147 

established line of royalty was a more abiding sentiment 
than irritation due to transient political occurrences. 
Never to disestablish an old line of kings is the rule of 
honour and principle of policy laid down in the sdstras. 
However drastic their treatment of individual Pandyan 
kings might have been, the Colas did not venture to 
displace the Pandyan line altogether. Sundara 
Pandya could not act differently towards the Colas now. 
And this no doubt is part of the answer to our question. 
But there was more. The subsequent course of history 
shows that the Pandya did not reap the full benefit of 
his victory on this occasion and that the Cola kingdom 
suffered less damage than it might have done. 

There was a third power at this time in South India 

which seems to have interfered to 
H oysai a iatervcn- redress the balance in favour of the 

tion. 

Colas. This was the power of the 
Hoysalas which had been growing steadily for a 
century since the time when Visnuvardliana started 
the policy of expansion and put an end to Cola 
power over a great part of the Mysore country. By the 
time of Maravarman Sundara Pandya ’s invasion of the 
Cola country, the reign of Ballal a II was drawing to a 
close. Among his queens is mentioned a princess, 
undoubtedly of Tamil Cola origin, and it is likely that 
the Cola ruler turned to Ballala for help in his trouble. 
At any rate, there is a Hoysala inscription which clearly 
implies that when Ballala was still living, his son VIra 
Narasimha marched against Srirangam in the South . 185 

l2 *Hoysana Hri-Vlraball&la-devana madam Vira-narasimha-devann 
ti^nkaltt -Rang ana mele ntufavandu. EC. vl, Cm, 56* 



148 


'THE CO^AS 


The date of this inscription presents some difficulties; 
but it corresponds in all probability to the 12th Septem- 
ber, A. D. 1217. 126 Another inscription describes 
Ballala himself as the establisher of the Cola kingdom 
and the lion to the Pandya-elephant ( Cdla-rajya - 
pratisthacaryam, Pundya gaja-kesari ), calls his son 
Narasimha. the sole protector of the Cola line 
(Colakulaikaraksa ) , and implies that Ballala II must 
have assumed his titles before the beginning of 
A.D. 1218. 127 An inscription from Govindanahalli 
describes with great force the valour of Narasimha in 
the campaigns he undertook for the restoration of the 
Cola. A still later grant from Belur (6. 1184) states 
that he rescued the Cola hidden behind the dust, viz., 
the crowd of his enemies, and earned for himself the 
titles Colasthdpana and Pandyakhandma . 12s It can be 
seen from the names of Narasimha ’s enemies that this 
campaign is different from the one recorded in the 
Tiruvendipuram inscription of Rajaraja Ill’s reign, 
and is perhaps the earlier one with which we are here 
concerned. And though the Kanarese campu, the 
J agawnathav ijaya identifies the Cola king protected 
by Ballala II with Rajaraja ( rdjardja-pratisthd - 
niratam) , lf9 this does not necessarily mean that 
Kulottunga III was no more at the time; for the 
Pandyan invasion and the Cola restoration alike 
fall within the short period of the joint-rule of 
Kulottunga and Rajaraja ( 1216-18 ) ; Rajaraja 

'"JIH. vi, p. 205. Contra El. vii, p. 162 and n. 10. See p. 177, 
n. 15 below. • 

"'EC. Iv. Nl. 29; JIH. vi. p. 201. 

'"EC. iv, Kr. 63; also Bl. 74. PK. 5 . 150; JIH. vi, pp. 203 — 4. 

> "JIH. vl, p. 200. 



8[5 


COLA EMPIRE 

l~ UNDER KULOTTUNGA HI 




RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 149 

who had a long reign before him was the real 
beneficiary of the Hoysala intervention, and this must 
be the reason for his name being chosen by the 
Kanarese poet. On the other hand, Sundara Pandya’s 
inscriptions mention Kulottunga III where they specify 
the name of the Cola monarch, and this is equally 
intelligible ; for there was glory in having defeated 
a glorious monarch who had fought many wars 
with success, and no point in mentioning a young prince 
who had just been made heir-apparent and of whom 
little was yet known. It is thus clear that the Hoysala 
intercession on behalf of the Cola must have had some- 
thing to do with the generosity of Sundara Pandya 
towards his vanquished enemy. 


Kulottunga III must have died soon after the 

Pandyan invasion. The latest regnal 

De tunga° f in ul6t year found in his inscriptions is the for- 
tieth, 130 A.D. 1217-18. Kulottunga III 
was also called Virarajendradeva, and a whole series 
of inscriptions containing this title, though not the 
name Kulottunga, undoubtedly belong to this reign 
and are dated in regnal years ranging from the 
second to the thirty-sixth. As already noted, the 
king; seems to have had also the title Komara or 
Kumara Kulottungan. 131 A new street formed in 
Tiruppugalur in the tenth year of the reign was called 
Rajakkal-tambiran-tiruvidi, 132 possibly after another 
surname of the ruling king. One inscription from 


•••162 of 1926 ; 273 of 1914 etc. 
»**259 of 1926; ante, pp. 116-6. 
“»80 of 1928. 



THE CO^AS 


iso 

Tiruvannamalai 133 is dated in the eleventh year of 
Tribhuvana-Vira-Cola-deva ; but considering the fact 
that the astronomical details preserved by this record 
were found by Kielliorn 134 not to work out correctly for 
this reign, it may be doubted if this title was assumed 
by the king so early in his reign. The earliest genuine 
record containing this title seems to be dated in the 
twenty-fourth year ; 135 the name recurs thereafter in 
several later inscriptions and in the great temple, 
Tribhuvanesvara, in Tribhuvanam, in the Tan j ore 
district. The form Tribhuvanacoladeva is also 
known . 133 The town of Karuvur was renamed Mudi- 
valangu-solapuram ; 137 there is also mentioned, in 
another inscription, a village of the name of Mudi- 
yalangu-sola-eaturvedimangalam ; 138 these facts show 
that Mudi-valangu-sola was one of the titles of the king, 
assumed, doubtless, in commemoration of the restitu- 
tion of the Pandya crown to the rulers of that 
country . 139 An inscription of the twenty-third year 
gives the characteristic titles of Kulottunga III and 
calls the ruler Tribhuvanacakravartin Sola-Keraja- 
deva , 140 thus confirming the statement of the Puduk- 
kottah inscriptions that after the conquest of Karuvur, 
he assumed that title. Kongu came to be called 

•*522 of 1902. 

"El. viii, m>. 7—8. 

"554 of 1904. Contra Hultzsch 811. iii, p. 205 and n. 5. 

"816 of 1909 (n.-d.) 

"61 of 1890 (Yr. 23). 

”659 of 1902 (Yr. 37). 

"M&ravarman Sundara Pftpcjya I also took the title: Mudl-yalangum- 
perum&l, PK. p. 153. 

"»75 of 1925. 



RAJADHIRAJA XI AND KULOTTUNGA IU A.D. 1163-1216 151 


Sola-Kerala-mandalam. It is doubtful, however, if 
some inscriptions with no other titles in them than Sola- 
Keraladeva can be ascribed to Kulottunga III . 141 
Lastly, as can be seen from a record of one of his 
feudatories, the king seems to have also had the title 
Karikala-Cola . 142 

Gangaikondasolapuram is mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions of the reign rather less frequently than one 
might expect , 143 but there is no doubt that it was the 
capital of the kingdom. The more ancient cities of 
Tanjore and Uraiyur still occupied a prominent position 
and, together with Ayirattal.i, constituted subsidiary 
capitals, the capture of which gave Maravarman 
Sundara Pandya I the practical mastery of the Cola 
kingdom. Vikramasolapuram is mentioned early in the 
reign as another royal residence . 144 A record of the 
thirty-fifth year casually mentions the king’s stay at 
Madura, perhaps a reference to the third Pandyan 
campaign of Kuldttunga . 145 

Kulottunga III was a great builder and his reign 

is a noteworthy epoch in the annals of 
Cola architecture. The public build- 
ings, mostly religious structures, undertaken and 
completed in the reign are enumerated in the Puduk- 
kottah inscriptions cited earlier and in a Sanskrit 

"'ARE. 1925, II, 22. 

14 *538 of 1902 (Yr. 27). 

***454 of 1912. 

‘“114 of 1919. 

,44 839 of 1914. 



152 


THE COLAS 


inscription 14 ® engraved round the central shrine of the 
temple of Kampaharesvara (called Tribhuvana- 
viresvara in the inscription) at Tribhuvanam, the most 
magnificent monument of the reign. Not much atten- 
tion has yet been given to this great temple, which 
'deserves to be better known than it is. Though its 
general design recalls in many ways that of the Tan j ore 
temple, it has still several significant features that dis-: 
tinguish it from the earlier model and mark the 
growing desire to fill the entire wall space with 
sculpture panels and decorative designs. The temple 
contains also an excellent series of Ramayana reliefs 
that await detailed study. The temple was consecrated 
by the king’s spiritual guru, Isvarasiva, the son of 
Srikantha Sambhu and the author of a theological 
treatise, the Siddhanta-ratn altar a . 1 4 7 

Besides constructing this fine temple, the king 
claims to have erected the mukha-mandapa of Sabha- 
pati, the gopura of goddess Girindraj a (Sivakami) and 
the verandah round the enclosure ( prakdra harmya ) in 
the temple at Cidambaram; he also improved the 
temples of Ekamresvara at Kanclpuram and of 
Halahalasya at Madura; the great Siva temples at 
Tiruvidaimarudur and Tiruvarur besides the Raja- 
rajesvara temple, perhaps of Darasuram, were the 
recipients of the king’s devoted attention. At Tiru- 
varur, he built the sdbhd-mandapa and the big gopura 
of Valmikesvara. 

**•190 of 1907. 

1908 II, 64—6. 



To face page 


Cl 

10 

H 





RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTTJNGA m A.D. 1163-1216 153 


In the twenty-third and twenty-fourth years of the 

reign, there was apparently a wide- 

Fa famine a ?eiicf. spread scarcity of food-grain resulting 

in acute famine. The inscriptions record 
nothing of state action by way of famine relief ; but it 
would not be safe to conclude that the state did nothing 
in such a situation. It should not be forgotten that the 
inscriptions are the records of a narrow range of tran- 
sactions and are by no means the Moral and Material 
Progress Reports of the times. It is therefore not a 
little remarkable that an inscription from North Arcot 
(Tiruvannamalai ) 148 records that during the famine, 
when rice was selling at one-fourth of a measure per 
ham, two persons started relief works in the form of an 
embankment to the river and the construction of a fresh 


tank, and paid the labourers in gold, paddy or any other 
form that they desired. The idea of organised famine 
relief was therefore quite well known, and it is only 
reasonable to presume that when private charity under- 
took such relief when required, the government would 
not have omitted to exert itself likewise. On the other 


hand, it is clear that the relief afforded by such measures 
did not go far enough, and unfortunate individuals who 
were the victims of famine were sometimes forced to 
seek other remedies. A Tanjore (Tiruppamburam) 
inscription 140 of the twenty-third year states, for 
instance, that owing to bad times and the high price of 
food-grains, a vellala and his two daughters sold them- 


14$ 560 of 1902 : impattu-ndl&vadu ixvhjattile kd&ukku ulakku artei 

vifkka . . . .ponmtm tSQina arttamum nellum aqaiya ifpu tirurwdiyaik-katti 

€ri kdn-kaiydlum. 

14B 86 of 1911. 

K— 20 



154 


THE CflLAS 


selves as slaves to the local matha for 110 Itasus, in order 
to escape death by starvation. 160 

The difficulties that Kulottunga faced and, for the 

Administration mos ^ P al ’t, overcame, did not result in 
and extent of the break-up of the administrative 

the empire. system or in the diminution of the extent 

of the empire, at least, up to the invasion of Sundara 
Pandya and the subversion of Cola authority. The 
repeated references to officials like Kalappalaraya, 
Nulambadhiraja and Pandya-raja, 151 and the part they 
take in conducting local enquiries on important affairs 
that came on appeal to the central government, 108 
together with the careful watch they maintain over the 
constitution and functioning of rural assemblies, 158 
form sufficient proof that the system of administration 
developed in the tenth and eleventh centuries was still 
functioning with tolerable efficiency at the beginning of 
the thirteenth. That a partial resurvey of land must 
have been undertaken in Tan j ore becomes clear from 
some inscriptions of the reign of Rajendra III from 
Kovilur 104 which mention a survey of the thirty-eighth 

180 The price of paddy mentioned in 86 of 1911 is 3 naiis per kd&u; 
this would mean, in terms of rice (converting at the ratio 8 of rice to 
paddy, the usual rate quoted in inscriptions), lb measures of rice per 
kd&u. 560 of 1902 of the next year from North Arcot gives the rate 
1 measure per kd$u. If the kd$u was the same coin in both instances, the 
famine must have prevailed over a somewhat wide area, and become very 
much more acute in the second year of the scarcity than in the first. If 
this surmise is correct, 86 of 1911 would be the case of a man whose 
resources gave way at an early stage in the famine, when measures of 
public relief either by state authorities or by private individuals were 
not yet thought of. 

a#, 457 of 1902. 

1B *83 of 1926. 

**■113 of 1928. 

*“188, 216 of 1908. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.t>. 1163-1216 155 


year of PeriyadSvar Tribhuvanaviradeva. The extent 
of Kulottunga ’s sway is attested by the presence of his 
records at Tinnevelly in the south , 155 at Hemavati, 
Avani and Yedurur in Mysore , 150 at Tadavur, Tagadur 
and Karuvur in the Kongu country , 157 and in the north, 
at Nellore and Reddipaleni in the Nellore district and 
at Nandalur and Pottappi in the Cuddapah district . 158 
It is remarkable that one of the inscriptions of Kulot- 
tunga from Mysore states that Vallaladeva was ruling 
the earth in the twelfth year of Kulottunga III , 169 
doubtless a reference to Ballala II, the Hoysala ruler, 
whose queen was a Colamahadevi, clearly a Cola 
princess . 160 


The relations between Kulottunga and his Telugu- 

Feudatories. Coda vassals of the north have been 

discussed already. We may now pro- 
ceed to enumerate the feudatories of the emperor in 
other parts of the dominion, and also notice some Telugu 
chieftains not mentioned already. A mahammidalesvara 
Tribhuvanamalla Malli Coda of Hemavati acknow- 
ledges Kulottunga’s supremacy very early in the 
reign . 101 The Granga chieftain of Kolar, Amarabliarana 
Gangas. Slyaganga, is represented by inscrip- 
tions ranging from the third to the 
thirty-fourth year of Kulottunga ’s reign. He had also 
the name Sura Nayaka, and one of his sons endowed a 


»*28 Of 1927. 

“117 of 1899; 460 Of 1911; 473 of 1911. 

“461 of 1913; 563 of 1902; 60 of 1890; 141 of 1905. 
“193 of 1894; NI. G. 86; 601, 602 of 1907; 435 of 1911. 
“460 of 1911 — BO. x. Mb. 44 (b). 

“ARB. 1912 II 30. PK. p. 148. 

“117 Of 1899 (Yr. 2). 



156 


THE CO^iAS 


\ 


lamp at Kalahasti in the third year (A. D. 1181). 162 
He himself endowed a lamp in Kanclpuram in the 
twenty-seventh year (A. D. 1205) 1BS and another at 
Kalahasti seven years later. 101 His queen Ariyapillai 
made gifts to the Tiruvallam temple. 165 This chieftain 
was the patron of the Tamil grammarian Pavanandi, a 
Jaina writer, whose N annul has practically displaced 
all other manuals of Tamil grammar. 

Other chieftains of Ganga extraction were : — 
Pirudivi Gangan Alagiya Solan, ruling in Pangala- 
nadu, who made gifts to the Tiruvannamalai temple in 
the thirteenth and twenty-seventh regnal years of 
Kulottunga III ; 106 Uttama Cola Ganga alias Selva 
Ganga, whose wife consecrated an image of Tirana vuk- 
karasudeva at Agastyakonda (North Arcot) ; 167 and 
Solagangadeva one of whose agam badi mudalis endowed 
a smidivilahlm at Tirunirmalai, (Chingleput). 168 

The Banas are represented by a number of minor 
Banas. celebrities and one powerful chieftain. 

Among the former may be noticed in par- 
ti cular, Ekavasagan Kulottungasola Vanakovaraiyan a 
native of Kalattur, 109 who is first mentioned in the 

>•=195 of 1892. 

>•*10 of 1893. 

>•‘116 of 1922. 

>•‘303 of 1897. 

>••646, 558 Of 1902. 

>*’659 of 1906 (Yr. 14). 

>‘•546 Of 1912, (Yr. 34). 


>••476 of 1907 (Yr. 33). 



RAJADHIRAJA IX AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 157 


second year , 170 and who continues to make donations in 
the Salem, Trichinopoly and Tan j ore districts almost to 
the end of the reign , 171 and one of whose subordinates, a 
Karkatakaraja, is mentioned in an inscription of the 
thirty-eighth year . 172 The prominent Bana chieftain of 
the period was the ruler of Magadai-mandalam repre- 
sented iu several inscriptions of the reign, some of them 
in good Tamil verse, as the hero of several battles and 
the builder of many temples. He is often called 
Ponparappina Magadesan in commemoration of his 
having gilded the roof of the temple of Tiruvanna- 
malai . 173 One of his ministers ( sandhi-vi yralii ) is said 
to have constructed a mandapa in Kllur . 174 He himself 
endowed some lamps at Tiruvannamalai 175 and 
assigned some dues as revenue to the Kilur temple . 178 
One of his agambadi itmdalis also endowed lamps in 
Aragandanallur . 177 He is also called Aragalurudaiyan 
and Raj ara jade van; Aragalur in the Salem district was 
his headquarters and it would seem that being bom in 
the reign of Rajarajadeva, he was named after the 
ruling sovereign of the time. One other chieftain, 
perhaps of the same family, is mentioned as enjoying 
the kani of Kugaiyur in South Arcot where he con- 
structed a stone temple, Sri Kailasa, with mandapas, 
prdkdras and gopuras, set up an image called Pon- 


”166 of 1908. 

”461 of 1913 (Yr. 6); 72 of 1890 (Yr. 28); 476 of 1907 (Yr. 33) etc. 
”688 of 1908. 

”24 b of 1903 (Yr. 4) ; 557 of 1902 (Yr. 35). 

”291 of 1902 (Yr. 20). 

”532 of 1902 (Yr. 21). 

”283 of 1902 (Yr. 33). 

”388 of 1902 (Yr. 31). 



158 


HIE COpAS 


parappina-Isvara, and constructed a tank and provided 
for its upkeep . 178 

The Sengenis or !§ambuvarayas, the Kadavarayus 
. t . and the Cedirayas form three clans of 

gambuvarayas. J 

powerful feudatories in the region 
comprising the two Arcot districts, and portions of 
Chingleput and Chittoor. Among the Sambuvarayas 
may be noticed : Ammaiyappan Pandinadu Kondan 
Kandar Suriyan Rajaraja who regulated the affairs of 
the temple at Brahmadesam (S. Arcot ), 170 constructed a 
mandapa at Emiayiram , 180 and presented two patlams 
to the temple at Accarapakkam ; 181 Ylrasolan Atti- 
mallan and Alappirandan Edirilisola, who ranged 
themselves in opposite camps ; 182 Ammaiyappan 
Kannudaipperumal alias Vikrama-sola ; 183 Yira- 
rakkada, who styles himself a Pallava, though he uses 
the Sengeni and Sambuvaraya titles, and assigns some 

taxes from devadma villages to the temple itself ; 181 
Kulottunga-sola who built a muligai in the Tunandar 
temple at Siyamangalam (N. Arcot ) 185 and gave twelve 
veils of land to the same temple ; 180 Solappillai 
alias Alagiya-sola (the son of Ammaiyappan), who 

1,s 93 of 1918 (Yr. 6); cf. p. 110 ante. 

”•167, 176 of 1918 (Yr. 4). 

*••845 of 1917 (Yr. 6). 
of 1901 (Yr. 12). 

J “264 of 1919 (Yr. 11). 

'••620 of 1919 (Yr. 13). 

3,4 68 of 1908 (Yr. 17). Possibly the Sengepis and Kft<Javarlyas 
(Pallavas) contracted dynastic alliances in this period, If they were not, 
from the beginning, different branches of the same stock. See ante p. 86. 

*■•61 of 1900 (Yr. 20). 

“*62 of 1900 (Yr. 24). 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 159 


presented to the Arulala Perumal temple an entire 
village including the taxes due from it , 187 and gave some 
land together with the taxes due therefrom to the temple 
at Tiruvottur (N. Areot) ; 188 Alagiya Siyan, whose 
name suggests some close connection between him and 
the contemporary Kadava chieftain, perhaps the father 
of Kopperunjinga who was also called Alagiya Siyan, — 
a suggestion enforced by the fact that the SambuvarSya 
makes a gift to an image set up by the Kadava ’s mother 
in the temple at Tiruvennainallur ; 189 and lastly, 
iSengeni Mindan Attimallan also called Kulottunga- 
sola, who makes gifts in Tiruvottur and Tinivallam in 
North Arcot as well as Accarapakkam in Chingleput . 190 

Let us now turn to the Kadavas. The role of this 

« 

The Kadavas important line of feudatories in the 

history of this period has been briefly 
pointed out already . 191 The inscriptions of the reign of 
Kulottunga III attest the increasing power of these 
chieftains who claimed descent from the ancient 
Pallavas. The central figure among the Kadavas of 
this reign was Kudalur Arasanarayanan Elisaimogan 
alias Jananatha Kaceiyarayan . 192 He was, as his name 
implies, the son of that Arasanarayanan who flourished 

‘•*36 of 1893 (Yr. 27). 

18S 94 of 1900 (Yr. 33). This princeling is also called Edirill-SOla. 
It is not clear if he was the same as AJappiyand&n Ediriligdla mentioned 
above. \ 

18 *487 of 1921. Note, however, that this inscription is a later copy. 

**°80 of 1900 (Yr. 2); 301 of 1897 (Yr. 8); 240 of 1901 (Yr. 15). 
The last record gives him the KuIOttunga-^OJa title; he may be therefore 
identical with the chief of this title mentioned in 61 of 1900 (Yr. 20) 
and noticed above. 

181 Ante, pp, 77 — 8. 

*•*157 of 1906, 



160 


THE CSL,AS 


in the reign of Kulottunga II, and this fact is expressly 
mentioned in a record of A.D. 1184. 103 There is an 
inscription found in two places, Yrddhacalam and 
Tiru venna i nail fir , 1 0 4 which is a prasasti in Tamil verse, 
recounting the deeds of some members of the Kadava 
line. The chief last mentioned in this prasasti is called 


Alappirandan Virasekharan alias Kadava va van, and is 
described as the son of Arasanarayanan Kacciyarayan 
alias Kadavarayan. This fact together with the date 
of the prasasti, Saka 1108 (A.D. 1186), leads us to 
identify him with Elisaimogan, the son of Arasa- 
naravana. 195 If this is correct, he must have inherited 
the title Kacciyarayan from his father. Inscriptions 
mentioning Ylrasekhara and giving him the titles 
Alappirandan, Kadavaraya, etc., or mentioning his 
connection with Kudaltir occur also, as we shall see, in 
the later regnal years of Kulottunga III ; this fact also 
tells in favour of the identity proposed above. The 
Kadava pi'asasti gives the genealogy of the line for 
four generations. After Vlrasekharn, however, there is 
a break. The next name we come to is that of Kudal 
Alappirandan Alagiya Pallavan Kadavarayan who 
figures in an inscription of the thirty-third year of 
Kulottunga III. The inscription says that lie con- 
firmed the gifts made by his grandfather, 190 whose name 
is unfortunately not stated. Another inscription of the 
thirty-fifth year mentions that the mother of Koppemn- 
jinga, the son of Alagiya Pallavan, set up an image of 


1, *413 of 1909. 

”‘74 of 1918; 463 of 1921. 

’••He is said to be of the Kiffuk-ku^i, Katfava line in 381 of 1921, n-d. 
”•63 of 1919. 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 161 


the goddess in the temple at Tiruvennainalltir. 197 The 
name of the lady is given as Silavatl in other records. 198 
If we assume, what is most likely, that Alagiya Pallavan 
and his son were in the main line of the Kadavas, and 
that it is this line that is represented in the prasasti 
mentioned above, then we may assume further that 
Alagiya Pallava was the son of VIrasekhara, and that 
the grandfather whose gifts he confirmed in A. D. 1211 
was no other than Arasanarayana of the time of 
Kulottunga II. The genealogy of the main line of the 
Kadavas thus reached is as follows : 


Eli£aim5gan who 
conquered the 
four quarters, 

I 

Atkolli (?)*•• 


Vajandanar 

. i 

Atkolliyar 

I 


I 

Aragan&rayanan Kacclyariya, 
0 . 1140 A.D. 

I 

Alappiyandan VIrasekhara. 

§ 1108, A.D. 1186. 

% 

ft 

I 

Alagiya Pallavan (Siyan) 
m. Silavati. 

, i 

Alagiya Slyan Kopperufiiinga 


We see thus that this family worked its way up 
more or less steadily from the days of Vikrama Cola, if 
not from the latter part of the reign of Kulottunga I. 
And the Vrddhacalam prasasti is extremely interesting 
from this point of view. It- says that Valandanar 
fought against the Singalese and the Gangas, and this 
may well be true as his age would fall in the later part 

1,f 487 of 1921. 

1M 197 of 1906. 

***486 of 1921, of the eleventh year of KSpperufijinga, from Tiru- 
veppainallQr, records the re-engraving of an older inscription of the 
12th year of Tribhuvanacakravartin R&jarajadeva recording a gift by 
Atkolli KAdavarSya for the birth of a son. 

K— 21 



162 


THE CO^AS 


of Kulottunga I’s reign when there was much fighting 
in the Ganga country, though there is no definite 
evidence of a war against Ceylon or even the Pandya 
country at the time. The verses on the next two chiefs, 
Atkolli and the ‘conqueror of the four quarters’, contain 
no data of historical value. To Arasanarayanan is 
attributed an expedition against the enemy strong- 
hold Vdddvi, nattdr temmalai Vdddvi senrerinddij, 
which is by no means easy to explain. His humbler, 
and certainly less apocryphal, achievements have been 
noted under Kulottunga II. There are three verses, 
mostly of empty rhetoric, on Virasekhara ; the only fact 
mentioned of him is that he started from the Western 
side of Gandaraditfan Vasal on an expedition against 

Kudal of Karkataka-marayan and the land of 
• • 

Adiyaman and that he devastated both the territories 
named. Evidently these are local conflicts among the 
feudatories of Kulottunga III. But the capture of 
Kudal appears to have marked a definite stage in the 
rise of the Kadavas who thereafter style themselves: 
‘born to rule the land of Kudal’ — Kddal-avani-ydlap- 
piranda, Virasekhara himself being the first to do so. 
Kudal or Kudalur cannot be identified with certainty, 
though we learn from an inscription that it formed 
part of Peruga]ur-nadu in Tirumunaippadi. At 
this point, we may note the existence of another 
prasasti , 200 which bears no date and relates to the wars 
and conquests of a certain Tondairnandalangonda 
Pallavandar alias Kadavarayar, the son of Kudal-alap- 
pirandar alias Kadavarayar. It appears quite likely 


s,4 296 of 1912=178 of 19*1. 



RAJADHIRAJA XX ANt> KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-12X6 163 


that, this is a prasasti of Alagiya Pallavan, the f ather of 
Kopperahjinga ; the events mentioned in the prasasti 
admirably fill the gap in the stox-y of the rise of the 
Kadavas between Virasekhara and Kopperunjinga. 
And if our view of this prasasti is right, Alagiya Siyan 
must have also had the name Pallavandar and must have 
carried forward the work of aggrandizement begun by 
Virasekhara and thus paved the way for the greater 
achievements of his son on a wider stage. The prasasti 
of Pallavandar states that he gained success in a hard- 

fought battle at iSovur;- 01 the enemy against whom he 

fought is not specified, but the result of the battle seems 

to have been his masterv over Tondai-nadu. This is 

|« • • • 

implied by the titles, ‘ruler of the land of the Pennar,’ 
‘ruler of the northern Vengadam hill (Tirupati),’ ‘the 
Pallava of Kan cl, ’ applied to him later in the same 
prasasti . 

We may now consider the other references to. the 
Kadavas in the inscriptions of the reign. Virasekhara 
Kadava, also called Arasanarayanan Alappirandan, 
presented a necklace (ekdvalli-vadam) of precious 
stones to the deity at Tiruvannamalai in the thirteenth 
year of Kulottunga (A. D. 1191) j 202 twelve years later, 
he beai*s the title Adigaiman of Kudalur, evidently 
assumed after his expedition against Kudalur and 

9 *'ARE. 1913, II, 6$ says that Kakatlyas were expelled from the south as 
a result of this battle by Kadava II. There is no basis for this statement 
unless it be one stanza in the pratianti which has reference to va4amannar t 
northern kings. This verse stands in no relation whatever to the Sevtlr 
fight, and it gives us the precious historical information that the 'northern 
kings’ who did not come and make obeisance to the K&4&va, could not find 
even a hill or a forest to which they could fly for refuge! 

80 *531 of 1902. 



164 


THE CO^AS 


Adigaiman mentioned before, and endows a lamp at 
Tiruvennai-nallur. 203 Two inscriptions of the third 
year (A. D. 1181) from the same place mention Kudal 
Mohan Alappirandan and Udaiyar Kadavarayar, 204 
perhaps names of one and the same person ; one of his 
again badi mudalis is said to come from Sendamangalam, 
the fortress city which held an important place under 
the Kadavas ; there is thus clear indication that Kudal 
and Sendamangalam were already in the possession 
of the Kadavas. Whether Mohan Alappirandan or 
Udaiyar Kaclavaraya is the same as VIrasekhara, and 
whether, if that he so, we must assume that the expedi- 
tion against Kudal and Adigaiman had taken place 
before A. I). 1181 are questions which cannot yet be 
answered with certainty. Another detail, equally un- 
certain, relates to the identity of Kudal Elisaimogan 
Manavalapperumal Vanilaikandan Rajaraja Kadava- 
rayan mentioned in two inscriptions from Tiruvennai- 
nallur and yrddhacalam. 205 

The princelings of the line of Malaiyamans 

Maiaiyam&ns. apparently adopted in this period the 

two titles Cediyaraya and Kovalaraya. 

The former title is evidence of the new tradition that 
was growing by which these chieftains sought to esta- 
blish a connection with the Haihayas of Cedi at a time 
when all ruling chieftains were busy finding a Puranic 

pedigree for themselves. Or^e of them is even called 

«' 312 of 1902. 

*•‘477, 479 Of 1921. 

”‘313 of 1902 (Yr. 17), 133 of 1900 (Yr. 28). 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KUI.OTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1210 165 


Sisupalan . 206 The other title indicates that the power 
of this group of feudatories centred round Koval, 
Tirukkovalur on the bank of the Pennar in the district 
of S. Arcot. As the members of this family are men- 
tioned in many inscriptions and mostly in connection 
with gifts to temples, and as they are often mere names 
to us, and as the names are often very similar, but yet 
differ in little ways that render it extremely difficult to 
decide if we have to deal with one and the same person 
or different individuals, it is needless to catalogue these 
names here . 2 " 7 A few facts of more general interest 
may, however, be noted. An inscription from North 
Arcot states that a certain Nlraniiijan Sedirayan, 
acting under orders from a Sambuvaraya, gave away a 
village as devaddna ; 208 this shows either that the 
Malaiyamans were in some measure subject to the 
Sambuvarayas, or at least that some of the former had 
to seek service under the latter. Some of the names and 
titles imply close dynastic, connections among the diffe- 
rent feudatory rulers: such names, for instance, as 
Vana-kula-rayan borne by a Kiliyur Malaiyaman ; 208 
V ana-kovaraiya Malaiyaman ; 210 and, strangest of all 
Sola-Ganga-Pallavaraiyan, a surname of the Sisupalan 
already noticed . 211 There is also a Pon-parappinan 
among the Malaiyamans of Kiliyur ; 212 the o. igin of the 
title is not explained. The mention of a Malaiyan 

•••73 of 1906 (Vr. 38). 

2 01 The details can be gathered from the Appendix. 

••*291 of 1912 (Yr. 20). 

*••390 of 1902 (Yr. 11). 

”•534 of 1902 (Yr. 25). 

*”73 of 1906 (Yr. 38). 

•”414 of 1909 (Yr. 6). 



166 


The cotiAS 


Narasimha-varman, also called Karikala Sola Adaiyur 
Nadalvan, in inscriptions from Cengama and Tiru- 
vannamalai , 213 shows that the Narasimha title, which 
first occurs in the name of Narasinga-munaiyadaraiyar, 
a contemporary of Sundaramurti, and again in that of 
a contemporary of Rajendradeva II , 214 still survived in 
the family of Malaiyamans in the days of Kulot- 
tunga III. 


The ancient line of Adigaimans of Tagadur rise 

Adigaimans. into prominence again in this reign as 

the subordinate allies of the Cola 

monarch. It seems probable that, as has been observed 
already, the Cola power regained in this period, with 
their assistance, paid, of what had been lost in conse- 
quence of the wars of Hoysala VisnuvarcLhana. The 
mention of Ballala II in an inscription of Kulottunga 
and the name Cola-mahadevi of Ballala ’s queen also 
imply a more friendly relation between the Colas and 
Hoysalas, perhaps the result either of a successful 
campaign or diplomatic mediation undertaken for the 
Colas by the Adigaimans. Rajarajadevan alias Adiya- 
man of Tagadur in Ganga-nadu made a gift to the 
temple of Tiruvannamalai of the entire village of 
Malaiyanur on the north bank of the Penpal* in 
Tagadur-niidu . 215 His title Rajarajan shows that the 
friendly relations between the chiefs of Tagadur and the 
Colas had been resumed in the life-time of Rajaraja II, 
if it had been at all completely broken off before. 


S3, 134 of 1900 (Yr. 3); 538 of 1902 (Yr. 27). 
“ 4 Ante 1, pp. 322 — 3. 

‘”536 of 1902 (Yr. 10). 



rAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 167 


Rajarajadevan ’s son was the more celebrated Vidugad- 
alagiya-Perumal ( vyamulctasravandjjvala ), who des- 
cribes himself as of the family of Elini, famous in 
iSangam literature, and has left many interesting 
inscriptions. The Samantan Adiyaman who gave a 
golden zone to the deity of Tirumanikuli in the nine- 
teenth year of Kulottunga III 210 might have been 
either the father or the son. The inscriptions of the 
son are found in Salem, North Arcot and South Arcot. 
Only some of them are dated in the reign of Kulottunga ; 
but as most of them are in verse, the absence of the 
suzerain’s name need not necessarily mean that the 
chieftain declared his independence . 217 In an inscrip- 
tion dated in the twenty-second year of Kulottunga, he 
calls himself lord of the three rivers Palar, Pennar, and 
Kaveri, and states that he built a stone temple at Siru- 
kottai on the banks of the Pennar and called it after his 
own name . 218 Another inscription from Tirumalai says 
that he renovated the images of a Yaksa and Yaksi near 
the Jain settlement on the Tirumalai hill originally set 
up by the Cera king Elini, one of his ancestors . 219 Yet 
another inscription from Cengama, North Arcot , 220 
engraved at his instance, shows how very influential he 
was in reality among the feudatories of the Co]a in this 
part of the country. It mentions an earlier compact 
concluded by him, in the twenty-first year, perhaps of 
Kulottunga III, with two chiefs, and renews the terms 

l,, 161 of 1902. 

"’C(. the undated inscriptions of NaralSkavIra — Studies vii; ante 
p. 58. 

•‘•8 of 1900. 

i, 75; El. vi, pp. 331—3. 

***107 of 1900; SII. vii, 119. 



168 


THE CO^AS 


of the alliance. The two chiefs are Karikala-sola 

Adaiyur-nadalvan and Sengeni Ammaiyappan Atti- 

mallan alias Yikramasola-nadalvan. The terms of the 

• • • •• 

compact include the provision that, so long as this 
mutual alliance holds, the Adigaiman should contract 
no alliance with certain other chiefs, Slyagangan being 
one of them. These local compacts of a political and 
diplomatic character with no reference whatever to the 
suzerain ruler furnish clear proof of the growing 
disruption of the Cola kingdom. Other evidence of 
this tendency will be noticed presently. A certain 
Kulottungasola Tagadadirayan alias Marasingadevan 
who is mentioned in an inscription 221 from Rayakota 
(Salem) may also belong to this period, though we can- 
not be sure of this. 


Other chieftains. 


Of the minor chieftains and officers mentioned in 

the records of the reign, we may note: 

Sendamangalam-udaiyan Araiyan Edi- 
rili-solan who founded in 1188 an agar am called Kulot- 
tunga-solan-niyayaparipalana-catm., and a couple of 
years later a temple called Y ikrama-eolis varam udaiyar, 
at Parakesari-nallur, a suburb of Cidambaram ; 222 
Gangaikondan Rajarajadeva alias Kottappiccolar who 
endows a lamp at Yedaranyam in A. D. 1182 ; 228 
Pancanadivanan N llagangaraiy an represented by an 
inscription recording the gift of an entire village, 224 and 


***Z of 1900. 

***393 of 1907; 309 of 1913. Was KulOttunga III also called Vlkrama 
C5|a? 

***415 Of 1904 (Yr. 4). 

***297 of 1895 (Yr. 5). 



RAJADHIRAJA II AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 ]69 


by others at Tirakkaccur and Kadapperi recording 
gifts of lamps ; 225 Rajaraja Vangara Muttaraiyan, a 
mandalika who gives the proceeds of a tax to the temple 
at Tittagudi in the eleventh year and assists in the 
inspection of the jewellery in the temple at Tiruvadat- 
turai in the next year ; 226 Timkkalattideva Yadavaraya 
whose gifts along with those of his wife Pudoli- 
madeviyar and his son, J§ingappil]aiyar alias Vira- 
raksasa Yadavaraya are recorded in Kalahasti, 
KancTpuram and Takkolam between the thirteenth and 
seventeenth years, and who had many titles, includ- 
ing Godavarl-tira-kanakharipura-varadhisvara ; 227 a 
Nulamba Duraivarasan described as mahamandales- 

• r 0 • 

vara Viraraksasa Sri Kanclpura-paramesvara whose 
single achievement seems to be the gift of a lamp at 
Ramagiri (Chingleput) ; 228 Tiiaikkodungunram-udai- 
yan Keralarajan alias Viramalagiya Nisadarajan of 
Ponnamaravati, whose wife Piratti Alvar, daughter of 
another Nisadarayan, built the shrine of goddess 
Brhadamba in Tiruvarangulam (Pudukkottah) ; 229 
Racamalla Yadavaraya, a subordinate of Erasiddha, 
who founded a new village Nagapudol, where his wife 
Kamaladevi dug a tank and named it after herself ; 230 
Viranarasimha Yadavaraya, with titles including 
Tirakkalattideva, Sasiltula Calukki and tani-ninru - 

”'271 of 1909 (Vr. 10) ; 275 of 1909 (Yr. 13); 131 of 1896 (Yr. 10). 

”•18 of 1903 (Yr. 11) ; 210 of 1929 (Yr. 12). 

”’87 of 1922; 197 of 1892; 38 of 1893; 16 of 1897. 

”•632 of 1904 (Yr. 15). 

•”320 of 1914 (Yr. 39); mentioned earlier in 311 of 1928 (Yr. 21); 
Pd. 161 (Yr. 29). 

”°V7. V. 11 (n.d.) ; 122 of 1922 (Yr. 30). 

K— 22 



170 


THE CO^AS 


venra, whose gifts are found recorded in Kalahasti , 881 
Ramagiri and Tiruppasur (Chingleput ), 232 and whose 
daughter Solavvaiyar also made a gift at Kalahasti ; 238 
and lastly a mandalika by name Pulladeva in the part 
of Mysore country which still remained in the Co) a 
empire . 234 

Attention has been drawn, earlier in this chapter, 

to the effects, on the central government, 

D ^SroL Central the P r °g ress i ve multiplication of 

quasi-independent local chieftaincies. 
The long list of Kulottunga’s feudatories given above, 
which is by no means exhaustive, shows how rapidly 
conditions were changing for the worse from the stand- 
point of the central administration. It was a movement 
in which cause and effect- reacted on each other. The 
growing weakness of the centre rendered necessary new 
arrangements of a more or less feudal character for 
local regulation and defence; these arrangements in 
their turn stood in the way of the centre regaining its 
former ascendancy when it attempted to do .so. 
Political compacts among local rulers attest the growth 
of imperia in imperio until the local imperia burst the 

shell of the central imperium under whose protection 
they had at first begun to take shape ; and these 
compacts are now seen to become even more n um erous 
in the reign of Kulottunga III than under his predeces- 
sor. If it is remembered that no Cola inscriptions of 

*•'94 of 1903 <Yr. 7); 120 of 1922 (Yr. 31). 

*“640 of 1904 (Yr. 32) ; 406 of 1896 (Yr. 36). 

*•‘156 of 1922 (Yr. 10) . 

**‘473 of 1911 (Yr. 32) . 



kAjADHIR&JA U AND KULOTTUNGA III A.D. 1163-1216 171 

this period are forthcoming from the Pandya country 
and that, apparently, the authority of the Cola ruler was 
not felt in the day-to-day administration of this area, 
it will be seen that the sphere of these compacts among 
local rulers is coterminous with the territory under the 
direct rule of Kulottunga. It is needless to detail the 
compacts or their terms here . 235 It should, however,- 
be noted that for every such recorded agreement to 
which we have access at present, there must have been 
many others which were unrecorded or of which the 
records have either perished or are yet to be recovered. 
By these local alliances, therefore, the regular function- 
ing of the king’s government must have been very 
seriously hampered. It is true that, as we shall see, 
under Kulottunga III and even under his unlucky suc- 
cessors Rajaraja III and Rajendra III, the forms of 
administrative procedure present the same appearance 
as in the best days of the empire under Rajaraja I and 
Rajendra I ; but the spirit behind these forms could no 
longer have been the same. 


a *‘See Appendix for details — in particular 440 of 1913; 223 of 1904; 
56 of 1922 (Yr. 13); 483 of 1908 (Yr. 18); 115 of 1900 (Yr. 20); 616 of 
1902 (Yr. 27); 435 of 1913 (Yr. 35); 489 of 1912 (Yr. 40). 



Chapter XVI 

RAJA RAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, 

THE END 1216—1279. 

The date of Rajaraja’s accession falls between 

Accession of June 27 and July 10, A.D. 1216. 1 
Rajaraja in. This no doubt marks, not his acces- 
sion to the throne in his absolute right, but his 
recognition by his predecessor as heir apparent. It 
must have been some time after this that Sundara 
Pandya ’s invasion of the Cola country and the interces- 
sion of Vira Narasimha to secure a respite for the 
Cola power occurred. And Kulottunga III died 
soon after. The reign of the third Rajaraja began 
badly, and these initial misfortunes were but the 
precursors of much greater calamities; again the 
Hoysalas had to come to the rescue. 

What was the relation of Rajaraja to Kulottunga ? 
Was he the son whom the Cola monarch (Kulot- 
tunga III) on his return from exile, presented 
to the Pandyan conqueror who sent for him in 
order to give him back his kingdom % This may have 
been so, but we lack definite evidence. Rajaraja’s 
inscriptions call Kulottunga III periyadevar (the elder 
lord) f so do the inscriptions of Rajaraja’s successor 
Rajendra III. 3 But this is not enough to sustain the 
inferences that Rajaraja was a son or nephew of 
Kulottunga III or that Rajendra was his brother. 4 

*E1. viii, p. 260, Kieihora. 

*409 of 1908. 

•216 of 1908. 

•Contra ARE . 1909, II, 51, 52. 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 1?5 


Periyadevar does not seem to signify anything more 
specific than priority in succession; Rajendra III des- 
cribes Rajaraja III also by the same term. 5 There 
seems to be no reason why we should not suppose that 
Rajaraja was the son of Kulottunga, and Rajendra of 
Rajaraja ; but this cannot yet be proved. 

The most common prasasti of the reign is a 

praiastis. relatively short description of the 

glories of Co]a rule under Rajaraja III ; 
it begins sir manni iru nangu tisai / and does not contain 
a single historical fact, and it is not worth studying the 
minor variations in the words of the prasasti. Two 
inscriptions containing this prasasti call for some 
remark. One of them comes from Tiruvorriyur 7 and is 
dated in the third year of a Parakesari alias Tribliuvaua 
Cakravarti Ulaguyya-vanda-perumal. Now the expres- 
sion Ij 1 a guy y a -vanda-pe ramal , the lord by whose 
coming the world was saved, is a title rather than a 
name, and is found in the inscriptions in relation to 
Kulottunga III 8 and Rajaraja III. 0 The title Para- 
kesari in this inscription points to Kulottunga III ; but 
no other inscription of that king is known to contain 
the prasasti now being considered. On the other hand, 
the prasasti itself and the contents of the record which 
have reference to the punishment of some persons for 
treason, a recurring feature of the reign of Rajaraja, 
point to the successor of Kulottunga III. This record 

'116 of 1911 (n-d). 

•51 of 1931, 76 of 1920, 23 Of 1891, 93 of 1892, etc. 

•125 of 1912. 

•120 of 1912 (Yr. 20), also from Tlruvorflyilr. 

•321 of 1911 (Yr. 2). 



THE COLAS 


in 

is, therefore, best assigned to the reign of Rajaraja, the 
Parakesari title given in it being held to be mistake for 
Rajakesari . 10 The same explanation holds also with 
regard to the second of the inscriptions mentioned 
above, a record from Tiruverumbur with the sir manni 
introduction and Parakesari title . 11 Such chance mis- 
takes can hardly justify the assumption, sometimes 
put forward, that, in this period, the Rajakesari and 
Parakesari titles were applied rather indifferently to 
one and the same king . 10 

Another much longer prasasti of a high literary 
quality, also of little use for purposes of history, begins 
with the words sir mannu malarmagal , la The state of 
the country, the personal appearance and the character 
of its ruler, and the subject races paying tribute to him, 
are all described in this prasasti ; but the description is 
so hyperbolic and conventional that we learn from it 
more of the ways of court-poets than of the subjects 
they handle. Two queens are mentioned, the senior, a 
Bana princess who is said to have shared equal authority 
with the king and to have been consecrated with him , 13 
and the junior having the title Buvana-muiududaiyaJ. 

■ ‘ARE. 1915 II 28. 

"ibid, 142 of 1914. 

ia 504 of 1918 (Yr. 4), 392 of 1918 (Yr. 7+1). The latter is badly 
conserved and the stones on which it is engraved seem to have been dis- 
placed ; and it is doubtful if the part containing an account of the conquest 

of 'the great city of Ceylon* really belongs to this prasasti: t Ko$ala$<iivM& 
koztaveftjilai valaiy&d# venzilangai m&nagar kov4%\ 
l *Ulagu4aiya perumd\u4<m okka w,u$i kavittd 1} 

Ir&jar&jan piripd vGJaikk&ri Jr&jardjan tiruttdli 

peztufctivGl urai Mtanda tanip&riai udan&rtai ptttudaiyd} 

puvaniyGl tanad&naiyiz-ptirakkum^Lridappurap-pmm&l 

Vdrtar-kula-nilarVi}akku t 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 1 75 


, The reign of Rajaraja was a period of continuous 

trouble. It coincides with an epoch of 

changes! great changes in the political map of the 

South, and Rajaraja was obviously no 
great warrior or statesman. The Colas were exposed to 
assaults from within and without. The Pandyas in the 
South and the Hoysalas in the West had by now 
risen to the rank! of great powers led by rulers of 
exceptional merit, ‘'and as has been pointed out before, 
the one chance of survival for the Colas was the rivalry 
between these two new powers neither of which would 
let the ancient Cola Kingdom fall a prey to the other. 
In the North-west the Calukyas of Kalyani had given 
way before the newly risen power of the Seunas. Ill the 
North-east, the Telugu Codas of Nellore held an 
important place and their relations with the Hoysalas 
on the one side and the Kakatiyas on the other, formed 
another remarkable chapter of the history of the time. 
Nearer home, the Kadava chieftains of Kudalur and 
Sendamangalam were not slow to take advantage of 
the growing weakness of their suzerain. ' 


1 For two centuries and a half after the invasion 
of Krsna III, in the middle of the tenth century, 
the Cola empire had grown in strength and prestige, and 
the set-back it suffered at the close of the reign of 
Kulottunga I had no vital consequences and had left the 
somewhat diminished empire quite as strong and influen- 
tial as ever. And it took a leading part in settling the 

'» * 

succession dispute in the Pandyan Kingdom. But the 
disaster that followed not long after, the invasion of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya in the closing years of 



176 


THE CO^AS 


the reign of Kulottunga III, exposed the hollowness of 
the Cola power in this period. For the first time in 
many generations, the Cola capitals were sacked by an 
enemy and the Cola king reduced to the position of a 
wandering refugee, a fate that the Colas had often 
inflicted on their enemies. The Cola king indeed 
regained his position, but after begging for it from his 
conqueror and on terms that no longer left him an 
independent ruler. And even this mercy was due to 
Hoysala aid. This was the signal for the overgrown 
vassals of the Cola Kingdom to disregard the authority 
of their suzerain, and at the earliest opportunity that 
offered itself, either to transfer their allegiance or to 
declare their independence. This was the state of 
affairs when Kulottunga III died, and the reign of 
Rajaraja III began. • 


' Inscriptions from the Tanjore District mention 

that there were great disorders in the 

in^he U flfth n yTar. year of the reign resulting in loss 

of security and damage to property. u 
These disorders are only vaguely characterised as 
duritangal (troubles) and ksobham (agitation), and 
there is no more indication of their exact nature. '* It is 
clear from the inscriptions, however, that they led to 
the temporary desertion of one temple, its images and 
movable property being carried elsewhere for safety, 
and the permanent destruction of the records and title- 
deeds of two villages which had subsequently to 
improvise fresh records after inquiry. These distur- 
bances might have been purely local ; at any rate there 


“Ml Of 1926 (Yr. 16+1). 213 of 1926 (Yr. 19). 309 of 1927 <a-d). 



1 


RAJABAJA III AND RAjfiNDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 177 


is no clear evidence of their being due to war or foreign 
invasion. 16 


*\ There were other conflicts going on in what was 


Other conflicts. 


still nominally Cola territory, conflicts 
of which wo hear only faint echoes 


in the records of the time. An inscription dated 
A. D. 1223-4 from the North Arcot District, 18 mentions a 


fight between Viranarasingadeva Yadavaraya and the 
Kadavaraya at Uratti, perhaps the Oratti of to-day in 
the Chingleput District. ' The fight is mentioned inci- 
dentally in commemorating the heroism of a soldier, 
who fought in the army of the Yadavaraya and lost 
his life in an attack on the Kadavaraya himself. 
Both these chieftains acknowledged the supremacy of 
the Co]a ruler in this period. We have no information 
concerning the occasion for the conflict and we 


cannot say if the Kadavaraya was Kopperunjinga 
himself or, what is perhaps more likely, his 
father. 17 The Kadavaraya also came into conflict 

• t 

with the Hoysala about the same time if not 
earlier. In an inscription which from its cyclic 
year may be dated about A.D. 1218, 18 Yira Nara- 
simha stvles himself Kancl-kaiicana Kadavakulantaka 


3 ®It is possible that EC. vi. Cm. 56 assigned to A.D. 1217 by Venkata- 
subbaiya (ante p. 148) is really dated, as Nultzsch thinks, in 1222 ( El . 
vii^ p. 162), and that Narasimlia’s march to Srlrangam had something to 
do with these disturbances which might have been the result of a P§.p<lyan 
invasion. Cf. ARE . 1923 II 7. If that was so, it is somewhat strange that 
we hear nothing more of this invasion from either the Coja or the P&^ujyan 
side. 

ie 271 of 1904. 

’^Possibly the verse on the northern kings in the Atti pra4asti of the 
K&davarfiya (296 of 1912) has reference to the conflict with the Yadava- 
r&ya. 

"EC. ix, Kn. 87. 

K — 23 



178 


THE C<H*AS 


and Kadavarayadisapatta. If the date of the inscrip- 
tion were not uncertain, we may even suppose that the 
Kadava had taken advantage of the invasion of the Cola 
country by the Pandya king or entered into league with 
him, and that, in order to save tire Cola kingdom, the 
Hoysalas had to deal with the Kadava as well as the 
Pandya himself. 19 Whatever that may be, there are 
other inscriptions which bring Narasimha into definite 
relation with KaiicI in this period. One of them, 
A.D. 1230, 20 states that Vira Narasimha was ruling from 
KaiicI, and another inscription, undated, mentions that 
some of his troops ( bherundas ) were stationed at 
KaiicI. 21 These references to local disturbances and wars 
among feudatories and to the supervening of Hoysala 
influence in different directions give a measure of the 
disintegration of the Cola Kingdom and the helplessness 
of its ruler in the midst of growing difficulties. This 
impression is strengthened by the unusually large num- 
ber of trials for treason reported in the inscriptions of 
the reign, which will be considered in some detail at a 
later stage. 

' Rajaraja was evidently not only weak but foolish. 
p&Qgyan inva- Por, if we may trust the Pandyan 

Bion ‘ inscriptions of the time, he deliberately 

broke the terms of the treaty with his Pandyan over- 
lord and thus contrived to bring about the capital 
disaster of the reign. ‘The Cola’, says the prasasti of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya I, , 

’•228 of 1929, (Yr. 10), discussed later in this chapter, p. 190. 

*‘BC. xii, Tp. 42. 

t'EC. t. Cn. 211 b. 



nijAHAJA III AND KAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 179 

^no longer considered it the proper course to own allegiance to 
the ruler who had bestowed the crown on him on a former occa- 
, sion. He began once more to feel that his security lay in his own 
fertile country, and declined to do the usual honour to the com- 
mands (of the Pandya), refused to pay the usual tribute, and 
(instead) despatched a large army ( perani ) preceded by an 
advance guard (tusi).’ 

The events that followed this attempt to throw off the 
Pandyan allegiance are described in the prasasti of 
Sundara Pandya and in a unique historical inscription 
from Tiruvendipuram 22 and in the historical romance, 
Gadyakarndmrta of Kalakalabha, composed not many 
years after the events. The reference to the events of 
the time by the last author is very brief, but illuminating. 
'Without his assistance, the proper sequence of events 
must have remained a matter for conjecture, and not the 
certainty that it now is. 

To begin with the Pandyan side of the story . 25 The 
expeditionary, force sent by the Cola was rolled back 
and a pitched battle fought in which the Colas suffered 
heavy loss in men, horse and elephants; the enemy 
country was irrigated with the blood of fallen foes and 
sowed with kavadi, the whole body of women in the 
enemy’s harem including the chief queen of the Cola 
monarch were taken captive, and made to carry the 
water- jar and other auspicious objects before the 
Pandyan ruler on the occasion of his triumphal entry 
into the Cola capital, Mudikonda-solapuram, where a 

2 •'142 of 1902, El. vil, pp. 160 If. 

23 The pra4asti containing these events has not been traced in any 
inscription dated before 1236 A.D. PA. p. 144 n. 3. But the date of 142 

of 1902 (A.D. 1231 — 2) and the Gadyakarty&mrta show clearly that they 
occurred about 1230 — 31. 



180 


THE COLAS 


mjaydbhiseka (the anointment of victors) was per- 
formed . 24 The Gr adyakarndmrta takes up the story at 
this point and connects it with the events recorded in 
the Tiruvendipuram inscription. It says : 25 

"‘Defeated iu battle by the Pandya ruler, King iiajaraja 
abandoned his capital and together with his retinue ( sapari - 
vdram) sought to reach the side of his ally, the ruler ol* Kuntala; 
while on his way, he was overtaken by the Kadava king — who 
had a vanguard of forest troops and had grown strong by the 
accession of the troops from foreign lands (mlccchadesa ) , — and 
together with his followers was taken captive after a fight. By 
this enemy who had descended on him like a bolt from the blue, 
who, by his many strategems, seemed a partial incarnation of 
Sambara, who was the very embodiment of guile in the cunning 
devices he adopted, — by this enemy, the King (iiajaraja) was 
dragged to his own city Jayantamangala. When he heard this 
painful news, (Narasimha) started (from his capital) in a few 
days, reached the northern bank of the Kaveri and encamped 
in the neighbourhood of Srlrangam, and despatched his danda - 
ndtha to punish all the enemy sdmantas, brought about the release 
of his friend, the Cola king, and levied tribute from the 
Pandya \ 

The Tiruvendipuram inscription narrates the cam- 
paign of the Hoysala Dandanathas in 
K part. Ufijinsa S considerable detail, and establishes the 

identity of the Kadava chieftain, who 
attacked and imprisoned Iiajaraja and subsequently 
released him, with the celebrated Kopperunjinga 
(Maharaja-simha in Sanskrit) who fills a rather large 
place in the annals of the period. Other inscriptions 

24 A fragmentary inscription dated 1152, 419 of 1914, from Tiruccufi 

(Rd.) mentions the defeat of Jananatha (who refused to make obeisance) 

by Sunda This may be a reference to this campaign; if so, 

Jananatha would be R&jar&ja HI. 

2 'Extract by M. R. Kavi in Tirumalai &ri VenkafBivara vi, pp. 677 — 8. 



RA J AKAJ A ITI AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 iBl 


from the Tamil and Kanarese country confirai these 
facts. 


That Kopperunjinga had come of age and was 
already prominent among the Kadava chieftains, and 
that these chieftains still acknowledged the overlord- 
ship of the Cola, at least in name, may be inferred from 
an inscription 28 found in Vrddhacalam, dated in the 
14th year of Iiajaraja (A.D. 1230) and recording an 
endowment by one of the agambadi mudalis of 
Kopperuhjinga. The Tiruvendipuram inscription 
opens with a statement of the facts mentioned in the 
Go d yakarn dm rt a, adding piquancy to the reports of 
Kopperuhjinga ’s misdeeds that reached N arashnha ; 
for here he is said not only to have imprisoned the Oo]a 

m 

emperor ( sola-cakravarti ) at Sendamangalam, but to 
have employed his troops to devastate the Cola country 
and desecrate its temples including Visnu-sthanas — the 
Hoysalas were staunch Vaisnavas. Narasimha left 
JDorasamudra, continues the inscription, saying that he 
would not allow his trumpet ( kdlam ■) to be blown until 
after he had re-established his name as the Defender of 
the Cola monarchy ( Cola-mayidalapmlistlidcdrya ) ; he 
uprooted the Magara kingdom, 27 doubtless an ally of the 
Pandya and Kadava, on his way, and encamped at 
Paceur, two miles to the north of the Coleroon opposite 

Sri rangam. From his camp, N arasimha despatched two 
dandandyakas, Appanna and Samudra Croppayya, with 
orders to carry destruction into the country of 


a, 136 of 1900, El. vii, pp. 163—4. 

27 Parts of the Salem and S. Arcot districts, QJM8. ii, p. 121, n, 2. 
Narasimha also captured the women and treasures of the Magara king. 



182 


THE COI^AS 


Kopperufij inga and re-instal the Cola emperor in liis 
place. Accordingly, the two commanders sacked Elleri 
and Kalliyur-mulai held by Kopperunjinga, and 
Toludagaiyur held by Sola-kon, evidently one of his 
lieutenants, killed some of the nmdalis of the king 

(Rajaraja) and Parakramabahu, the king of Ceylon, 
who had joined the enemy, and, after worshipping the 
God of Cidambaram, they devastated many places 
such as Tondamanallur, Tiruvadi and Tiruvakkarai, to 
the south of the river Varanavasi (Gadilani) and east 
of Sendamangalam, and struck terror into the hearts 
of the inhabitants by burning crops,-" capturing women 
and plundering people; finally they made preparations 
to invest Sendamangalain, when Kopperufij inga sent 
word to Narasimlia that he was ready to restore the 
Cola emperor to libert y and his throne, and Narasimlia 
transmitted the offer to his commanders. Then they 
received the Cola emperor with honour apd accom- 
panied him back to his country. 


So far the Tiruvendipurain inscription. The sug- 
gestion has been made that the inscription is found 
engraved in this village, because it was here that the 
Hoysala generals took leave of the Cola king 
Rajaraja III, after his restoration . 20 All the villages 
mentioned in this inscription have been traced in the 
South Arcot District. It is not clear, however, who the 
Ceylon ruler Parakramabahu was. He cannot be iden- 
tical with Parakramabahu II of Ceylon who came to the 


2 *This, I think is the meaning of: Kn^ikkdlgal(um) iuffitm alittum , 
rather than ‘drinking channels'. KuQikk&l is perhaps a variant of 
Jco^ikkdl, 

vii, p. 162. 



RAJARAJA III AND UAjgNDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 183 

throne in 1236, 30 for here Parakramabahu is said to 
have lost his life in the year 1230. He was perhaps some 
other prince of the Ceylonese royal family and may be 
taken to correspond to the mleccha and vaidesika help 
which Kopperunjinga commanded in this fight, 
according to the author of the Gadyakarndmrta. 

Other inscriptions confirm these facts and in one 
important respect supplement the Tiruvendipuram 
record. One of them states that Appanna and 
Goppayya earned the praises of Narasimha by attack- 
ing the Kadavaraya and releasing the Cola. 31 Another 
inscription dated A.D. 1232 states that the country 
round Nidur in the Tanjore district was formerly ruled 
by Kopperunjinga, and records a revision of the rules 
of tenancy cultivation rendered necessary thereby. 31 * 
An undated inscription from Vayalur 32 mentions that 
Kopperunjinga alias Alagiya Siva defeated the Cola 
King at Teljaru, a fact mentioned nowhere else, and 
having cast him and his ministers in prison, occupied 
the Cola countiy. After the brief prose passage record- 
ing these facts, there occur five verses in different 
metres in praise of Kopperunjinga ’s heroism in which, 
of course, we hear nothing of the release of the Cola or 
of the success of the Hoysala generals, but only of the 
defeat of the Karnatas and the glories of Kopperun- 
jinga, also called by the titles Avani-Narayana, Nrpa- 

»»C7. ii, p. xlv. 

"KflQavarttyana kidisi COlana hi (list tandu. alligc. meed — EC. xii, 
Gb. 95. 

••*536 of 1921. 

»«418 of 1922. 



184 


THE CS^AS 


tunga, and ruler of Tondai and Mallai. The same 
features recur in other inscriptions of his in the 
Sanskrit language. 33 That Kopperunjinga and the 
Hoysalas continued their fights becomes clear from the 
fact that Vira Somesvara is said to have encamped at 
Mangalam in the course of a campaign against the 
Kadava in the year Durmukha (A. D. 1236). :M 


While his generals were carrying out his instrac- 

tions regarding Koppcrunjinga and the 
Coja King, Narasimha himself con- 
ducted operations against the Panclya. 
The Gadyakarn dmrta asserts that Karasimha levied 
tribute from the Pandva ruler, and it seems that the 


Defeat of the 

P&£<}ya. 


**419 of 1893; 197 of 1905; 182 of 1919 etc. ARE. 1923 II 5—8 
discusses the Kopperunjinga problem with reference to 418 of 1922, and 

reaches the conclusions that Alagiya Slyan was different, from Mah&raja- 
simha, and that the former defeated and imprisoned Rajaraja III twice, 
once in 1221-22 after Tellayu and about 1231 — 2 (Tiruvendipuram record). 
The reasons for these surprising conclusions are said to be two: that the 

Vayaliir record calls the king, Alagiya Slyan and that it docs not mention 
Sendamangalam. We are also solemnly assured that Maharajas] mha in 
his records Kslrapagadak§ina-nayaka and Penna-nadfnatha, ‘titles not 
known of Alagiya Slyan Kopperunjinga whose conquests extended only 
up to the Kaverl in the South’ (paragraph 8). In fact, Alagiya 6iyan 
Kopperufijinga means Kopperufijinga, the son of AJagiya Siyan. The 
VayalQr record opens with the following prose passage: (1.1) Savastl 6r! 
Sakalabhuvana-Cakravarti Sri Kopperuhjingan ^51anait-teH5,rril (1 2) 
venpu sakala parlccinnamum-goptiu §6J.anaic-cijraiyittu vait.tuc-c6pS,4« 
kop4^ A(l. 3)lagiya 6iyan. It is seen then, that the name Kopperufijinga 
is given at the very outset, and then the king is also called Alagiya Slyan, 
‘the beautiful lion* — either the name of the father being applied to the son 
or the expression being used merely as a title. After the mention of the 

name Kopperufijinga, the omission of §0ndamangalam is immaterial. There 
is no reason then to postulate a double imprisonment of the COJa king. The 
VSyalCtr pra&anti is said to be a composition of Sokka~&lyan (paragraph 5). 
In fact, the end reads: idu $okkac-ciyan dnai meaning, ‘this is by order of 

Sokka (Alagiya) Slyan (engraved).’ 

t4 EC . v. Ak. 123. Mangalam is a village in the Vfddhacalam Taluq 
about ten miles south-west of Sendamangalam. 



RAJARAJA KI AND RAjfiNDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 185 


decisive encounter between the Pandya and Hoysala 
troops took place at Mahendramangalam on the Kaveri 
river . 35 An inscription at Haranahalli 38 mentions that 
Narasimha was encamped at Ravitadanakoppa with the 
object of leading a campaign against the Pandya king 
and states that the sea was roaring out its advice to the 
latter to give up everything to the Hoysala and live in 
peace as his servant. Other Hoysala inscriptions state - 
that Ramesvaram was reached in the course of this 
campaign or soon after . 37 We hear nothing of all this 
from the Pandya inscriptions. In the prasasti of 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya I, the account of his 
second campaign against the Cola stops with the 
vijayabhiseka, and this is obviously not the whole truth ; 
for it leaves unexplained the restoration of Rajaraja to 
the Cola throne after he was forced to relinquish it to 
the Pandyan invader. There can be no doubt that for a 
second time the Hoysala maintained the balance of 
power among the southern kingdoms by preventing the 
abolition of the independent Cola monarchy and the 
annexation of its territory to the Pandyan kingdom. 
The political settlement reached at the close of these 
campaigns in aid of the Cola seems to have been sealed 
by dynastic marriages ; Yira Somesvara, the son of Vlra 
Narasimha, is called mdmadi by the successors of both 
Mar. Sundara Pandya I and Rajaraja III . 88 


»'M. R. Kavi, ibid. 

•'EC. v. Ak. 123. 

** Qjm . li, p. 122, PK. p. 150. 

88 We do not know the details of these marriage alliances. Sewell's 
statement {HI SI. p. 136) that Narasimha II gave his daughter in marriage 
to the C6ja king Rajaraja III seems to be no more than a plausible guess. 

K— 24 



186 


THE CO^AS 


For the rest of his reign, Rajaraja continued 

to enjoy his position without any 


State of the 
C6|a Power. 


serious trouble. The provenance of 
Rajaraja’s inscriptions shows that for 


the bulk of the period his nominal 


sway extended over practically the whole of the Cola 
kingdom as it was at the death of Kulottunga III. The 


contents of the inscriptions indicate equally clearly the 
growing dependence of the Cola power on Hoysala 
support and the progressive increase of local disorders 
and treasons and the disregard of the feudatories of 


the empire for the central power. »The forms of central 
government and local administration appear to have 
remained the same as before ; but the executive 
strength of the government, never very great in the 


Hindu state, but realised in a greater measure under 
the great Colas than under any other dynasty, was now 
visibly on the wane. In A.D. 1246, 39 Rajendra was 
recognised as heir apparent, as is seen from the dates 
in his inscriptions. 

* The inscriptions of Rajaraja III dated up to the 
thirtieth year if not later are found in the modern 


districts of Salem, Chittoor, Cuddapah and Nellore ; we 
find also the inscriptions of his successor Rajendra III 


over practically the same area; these facts imply that 
the hegemony of the Cola power continued to be recog- 
nised over the whole of this area in this period. But 
this was no more than a traditional form which appa- 
rently persisted for some time after its substance had 
disappeared. For nothing stands out in clearer relief 


••March 21 to April 20 — BJ. viii, p. 7, Kielhom. 



RAJARAJA III AND RAjfiNDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 1 8? 


from the records of the time than the absence of a 
central co-ordinating authority, and the readiness with 
which treasons and conspiracies seem to have been set 
on foot. We have traced the growth of the practice 
among focal chieftains of contracting alliances for 
offence and defence without any regard to the central 
government; the habit had spread to the heart of the 
Cola country by the beginning of Rajaraja’s reign and 
there is an instance 40 of three chiefs in the Tanjore dis- 
trict itself contracting such a mutual alliance in the 
third year of the reign, A.D. 1219 ; except for the facts 
that the inscription recording this event is dated in a 
regnal year of Rajaraja III, and that the treaty of 
alliance acknowledged a common fealty due from the 
allies to the Cola king, which perhaps meant that the 
alliance would not hold against that ruler, there is no 
evidence that the government of Rajaraja had anything 
to do with it. Another instance of a rather protracted 
feud ending in a matrimonial alliance between the 
parties is furnished by a record of A.D. 1232 from 
Tiruvennainallur ; 41 the parties to the dispute and to the 
alliance that followed it were members of the Kadava- 
raya and Cediraya families. » 


Instances of treason have reached us not through 


Disorder and ^ 
weak government. 


direct testimony, but by the indirect 
evidence of inscriptions recording the 
public sale of land and other property 


forfeited to the state on account of treasonable offences 


( rajadroham ) ; it is not possible, therefore, to discover 
the exact nature of the offences which led to the punish- 

‘"23 Of 1897. 

“480, 481 of 1921. 



188 


THE CO^AS 


ment or any details regarding them. Though such cases 
were not unknown under other Cola rulers, the number of 
reported instances is unusually large during Raj araja’s 
reign, and it appears legitimate to suppose that this is 
partly due to the unsettled condition of the land and 
the loss of strength and efficiency in the central govern- 
ment. There was a public . auction ( Bdjarajapperw - 
vilai ) in Shiyali (Tanjore Dt.) on the 317th day of the 
eighth regnal year of the king, 42 at which the king’s offi- 
cers specially chosen for the purpose disposed of lands 
belonging to some traitors and such among their rela- 
tions, employees and slaves as had been involved in the 
treason ( drohattukku utpattarum). An inscription 
from Valivalam (Tanjore District) 43 records that in 
A.D. 1230, a commission of eight royal officers realised 
33,000 hams as proceeds of a similar sale of lands for- 
feited by persons who had turned against the king — 
drohigaldyp-palaraiyimi kdni marina nilam. Again at 
Koyil Tirumalam, 44 an order of confiscation issued on 
the 348th day of the 20th year, was given effect to on the 
80th day of the succeeding year, at an interval of about 
three months, and five veil and four md of land yielded 
to the royal treasury a sum of 13,000 kdsua. More 
details are forthcoming in regard to the next instance 

from Sivapuram (Tanjore Dt.) and of the twenty-third 
regnal year; 45 these details show that the charge of 
rajadroham should not be understood in the sense that 
suggests itself at first sight, that of treason in a political 

*>393 of 1918. 

**112 of 1911. 

“244 of 1917. 

“279 of 1927; ARE. 1927 II 30. 



HAJARAJA III AND ItAJKNDItA III, THE END 1216-1279 189 

sense, but in that o! turbulence or persistent insubordi- 
nation. In this particular case, two siva-brahmanas 
(temple priests) were punished by the mdkesvaras (the 
congregation) and the Hr for rdjardroham and siva- 
drohmn. The inscription says that the accused handed 
over to a concubine the jewels belonging to the goddess, 
misappropriated temple funds entrusted to them, 
refused to pay the dues on lands held by them, 
and misbehaved in other ways ; they not only 
ignored commands issued to them by the king, 
but maltreated the messengers of the king by 
beating them and ducking them. They are also said 
to have committed indescribable sins through the 

Kannadiyas and to have collected 50,000 (coins?), 
perhaps a case of irresponsible local oppression. The 
mention of the Kannadiyas must be particularly noted ; 
for it points to an incidental result of Hoysala interven- 
tion in the Cola kingdom and indicates the presence of 
bands of mercenaries who had no sympathy with the 
local population and were ready to carry out the bid- 
dings of any ruffian who commanded the means to pay 
them. There is yet another instance also from the 
Tanjore district (Tiruvenkadu) 46 of forfeiture of 
property for treason which is seen, from the name of 
the tirumandira-dlai, to be clearly of the reign of 
Rajaraja III. It is remarkable that all these instances 
come from the central regions of the Cola kingdom, 
clear proof that the administration was floundering 

even in the limited area to which it had become con- 


*•506 of 1918 (Yr. 18). 



i90 


THE CO^AS 


fined by the increasing' independence of the greater 
vassals in the outlying parts of the kin gdom. 

The intervention of the Hoysala power secured for 

Hoysaias. the Cola kingdom a somewhat longer 

lease of life than the Pandyas would 
have allowed it ; but this respite was not obtained with- 
out some cost, and it is worth while tracing the part of 
the Hoysala princes and generals in the affairs of the 
Cola country as revealed by the Cola inscriptions them- 
selves. An inscription from Tiruvadatturai (in the 
Vrddhacalam Taluq of the South Arcot district) dated 
in the tenth year, 47 A.D. 1226, states that the Hoysala 
king Narasimhadeva had destroyed the country and 
carried away images from the temple of that village 
some time before, and records the reconsecration of the 
temple. The date of this record seems to rule out the 
possibility of connecting these transactions with the 
campaign of Appanna and Samudra Coppayya, record- 
ed in the Tiruvendipuram inscription. 4 * It has been 
pointed out before that Narasimlia might have taken 
the side of the Cola earlier on the occasion of the first 
Pandyan invasion and proceeded against the Kadava 
ally of the Pandyan invader. 49 Possibly, Tiruvadat- 
turai was then in the occupation of the Kadava and 
suffered damage as part of the enemy country. The 
Kadava was forced once more to acknowledge the Cola 
overlordship, and when peace was restored, the people 
became free to repair the damages inflicted by war. 

4 *228 of 1929. The name of B&jar&ja does not appear in the record; 
but It is surely of his reign. ARE. 1929 II 48. 

"Contra ARE. ibid. 

"Ante p. 178. 



KAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 191 

The presence of Hoysala troops (bherundas) at Kanci 
about this time is attested by the gift of a lamp to 

Attiytir Alvar by Bacaladevi, the daughter of 
Bhutadeya-nayaka of Dorasamudra, 50 of another lamp 
three years later by the mahdpradhmi Ammanna 
Dandanfiyaka, 51 and of a whole village by Gopayya 
Dandanayaka in A.D. 1231. 52 Some time later a 
pradham of Somesvara, the son and successor of 
Narasimha, also makes a gift at Kancipuram. 53 

' Hoysala influence in other parts of the kingdom 
is attested by record of gifts by Yallaya Dandanayaka, 
a pradliani of Narasimha, at Tirumalavadi 54 by a mem- 
ber of the subordinate establishment ( sirupillaigal ) of 
Narasimha’s queen Somaladevi at Tirugokarnam ; 55 
Yallaya is also seen making another gift at Kancipuram 
in A.D. 1238, when he is called a pradhani of 
Somesvara. 50 

' * In fact, after they began sometime about 1218 to 
take the side of the Colas against the Pandyas in the 
struggle between these two powers, the Hoysalas appear 
steadily to have improved their position and influence 
in the Cola and the Pandya kingdoms. They evidently 
aspired to a sort of hegemony over the whole 
of South India and to some extent succeeded in 

•°349 of 1919 (Yr. 11). 

*‘408 Of 1919 (Yr. 14). 

“404 of 1919 (Yr. 16). 

”369 of 1919 (Yr. 20) Other gifts by Hoysala generals: 611, 612, 
616 of 1919 (Yr. 24); 138 Of 1905 (Karuvftr, Yr. 24). 

**39 of 1920 (Yr. 20). 

•*Pd. 183 (Yr. 20). 

”366 of 1919. 



192 


THE CO^AS 


realising their ambition for a time, during the 
second quarter of the thirteenth century. Depend- 
ing for their very existence on the backing 
of the Hoysalas, the Colas were in no position to 
offer any resistance to their aggrandizement ; even the 
Pandyas found themselves compelled to purchase peace 
with the Hoysalas by a tacit recognition of their domi- 
nant position. Attention may be drawn here to the fre- 
quent mention of Hoysala Kings and generals in the 
Pandyan inscriptions of the period, 57 and in particular, 
to two records from Pudukkottah, 58 dated about 
A. D. 1245, which mention the capture of Kana-nadu by 
Ravi-deva, a general of the Hoysala Vira-Somesvara. 
It was not till the rise of the greatest Pandya ruler of 
the time, Jatavarman Sundara Pandva, i.e., till after 
the middle of the century, that the expansion of the 
Hoysala power received a check. * 

Por all its weakness, the Cola power maintained the 

appearance of sovereign rule over a con- 
MjarljaTi^ siderable territory almost till towards 

the end of Rajaraja’s long reign. This 
becomes clear from a review of the inscriptions dated 
in his regnal years and issued by rulers who still called 
themselves vassals of the Cola emperor. Even the 
notorious Kopperunjinga was no exception. We have 
seen that the attempt of this chieftain to throw off his 
allegiance to his Cola overlord was suppressed in 1230-31 
by the intercession of Yira-Narasimha. The inscrip- 
tions of Kopperunjinga, however, show that he had a 
rather long and stormy career, and that in the political 

"PK. pp. 158—9. 

••Pd. 340, 341. 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJfiNDRA HI, THE END 1216-1279 1 93 


confusion that prevailed in the period, he found it easy 
to set himself up as a more or less independent ruler and 
pursue a policy of his own towards the neighbouring 
states. He counts his regnal years from A.D. 1243 and 
inscriptions citing these years run in a series up to the 
thirty-sixth year, c. A. D. 1279, i.e., almost to the end of 
the period covered by this chapter. It is needless to 
follow here the details of his career. His conflicts with 
the Hoysalas and the Kakatiyas whose supremacy he 
had to acknowledge in the north, 59 the attack on his 
capital Sendamangalam delivered by Jatavarman 
►Sundara Pandya, and the numberless gifts made and 
constructions undertaken by Kopperunjinga at various 
places in the whole area extending from Tan j ore as far 
as Draksarama and Tripurantakam — these do not 
properly belong to Cola history. It should, however, be 
noted that as late as A.D. 1246 and 1247 we find the 
officials and relatives of Kopperunjinga, if not the 
chieftain himself, acknowledging the overlordship of 
Rajaraja III. 80 Among the other feudatories, the 
Telugu-Codas, of whom something has been said 
already, may be noted first. Manumasiddharasa who 
had the title Oalukya-narayana and made a gift to the 

great Siva temple at Kanclpuram in A.D. 1218 ;° l 
Madhurantaka Pottappiccola Erasiddharasa, gifts 
from whose officials and relatives are recorded in Raja- 
raja’s inscriptions from Kanclpuram and Nellore 

‘•419-c of 1893. Ambadeva, the feudatory of the KUkatiyas, is called 
KttQavaraya-vimardaka. 173, 268 of 1906. 

*'604 of 1902; 488-a. of 1902. 

•*8 of 1893. 

K— 25 



194 


THE COLAS 


between his fifth and eleventh regnal years ; 62 Malama- 
devarasa and Pudoliyarasa mentioned in records of the 
sixth and eighth years of Rajaraja from the Chittoor dis- 
trict ; 03 and the great Tilcka I himself who figures under 
the name Ganclagopala along with his queen and his 
officials in a large number of Rajaraja’s inscriptions, 64 
are the chief among the Telugu-Codas who flourished in 
this rei gn . Like wi se we fin d a number of Ya da varayas, 
Sambuviarayas and Cediyarayas also among the feuda- 
tories, particularly in the earlier years of the reign; 
it is not necessary to repeat the names of these chieftains 
which may be gathered by a perusal of the inscriptions 
of the reign brought together elsewhere in this volume ; 
but the fact that so many of these well-known local 
dynasties continued to acknowledge the Cola overlord- 
ship till so late in the reign of Rajaraja is of some signi- 
ficance in the history of the decline and fall of the 
Cola empire. Some of the names show that chieftains 
of Bana, Vaidumba, Nu]amba and Ganga extraction 
were also counted among these feudatories. We 
have already mentioned Hoysala generals citing the 
regnal years of Rajaraja while recording their gifts 
in Kancipuram, Karuvur 65 and other places. Even a 
Kalinga ruler Aniyanga Bhlmadeva Rahuta adopts this 
course in making an endowment in Kancipuram in the 
twentieth year of Rajaraja, A. D. 123'6. 68 These facts 

«363 of 1919; NI. R. 38, G. 58. 

••104 of 1922; 88 of 1889. 

•♦Appendix: R&jar&ja III. 

••138 of 1905 (Yr. 24). 

••445 Of 1919. 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 195 


show that the hold of the Cola empire on the imagination 
of the people was still great, even after the disasters 
brought on it by the incompetence and cowardice of 
Rajaraja III. 

Rajendra, who, as we have seen, was recognised as 

heir apparent in A.D. 1246, was an abler 
T1 RaK^dra. n ° f prince than Rajaraja III. His inscrip- 
tions contain a Sanskrit prasasti which 
records his efforts to restore to the Colas at least a part 
of their ancient power and prestige which they had lost 
so completely owing to the utter incapacity of Rajaraja. 
For over ten years after his right to the succession was 
recognised, Rajaraja continued to rule in name, but 
there can bo little doubt that during all this period, and 
perhaps even for some years before, the substance of 
power lay in the hands of his abler colleague. The 
inscriptions of Rajaraja diminish in their number 
and range in the closing years of his reign, particularly 
from the thirty-fourth regnal year, when they are con- 
fined practically to the two modem districts of North 
Arcot and Nellore. In the same period, the inscriptions 
of Rajendra, on the other hand, are relatively more 
numerous and come from practically all parts of the 
Cola kingdom. This can hardly be an accident, and 
must be ascribed to some definite understanding by 
which the baneful effects of Rajaraja’s political in- 
competence were circumscribed. There is no evidence 

that Rajaraja and Rajendra were ever engaged in a 
civil war, as has sometimes been thought, or that there 



196 


THE COJjAS 


was a formal division of the kingdom, or, finally, that 
Rajaraja was murdered by Rajendra. 67 


It may be doubted if the prasasli of Rajendra 

mentions the historical facts recorded 

The success of • -j • ,1 1 x , ,, . , 

Eajendra. 111 ^ 111 tiie order ox their occurrence, and 

considering the fact that the prdsasti 
can be traced to the seventh year of Rajendra, C7a 
A.D. 1253, when Rajaraja was still alive, we may con- 
clude that in a few years after he became heir-apparent, 


‘“The relations between Rajaraja 111 and Rajendra III have been 
much misunderstood. We have one more instance here of a tentative 
suggestion put forward by a pioneer scholar being regarded as an 
established tact and made the basis oi further reconstructions. Dealing 
with 64 and 66 of 1692, two inscriptions of Rajendra of the seventh 
and eighth regnal years, Venkayya observed in I960: “Thai there was at 
least one other Copt contemporary ot Vila Sdmesvaia is shown by two 


inscriptions in the Ranganatha temple Srirangam (64 and 65 of 1892) 
dated during the reign of the Coja King Tribhuvana-Cakravarti Rajendra 
COla-deva. il this Copt King was reigning during the time of Rajaraja 111 
and independently oi him, it may show that the decline of the Colas 
about las time was due, partly at least, to internal dissensions.” {ARE, 
1900, paragraph 30). He also said in another connection in the same 
lepoit: “As both Cola-Tikka and V ira-Somes\ ara claim to have established 
the Copt King on his throne, and as they were lighting with one another, 
it may be assumed that they took up the cause oi two opposing claimants 
to the Cola Kingdom,” {Ibid, paragraph, 48). It does not need much 
reflection to see that either of these statements constitutes only 
one of several possible explanations of the fact cited in each 
case. Yet, all subsequent writers have just accepted these suggestions of 
Venkayya as settled facts, and have been rather obsessed by them. For, 
otherwise, there would not have been the attempt, noticed above, to main- 
tain, on such slender evidence, that Rajaraja HI and Rajendra 111 were 
brothers; and Krishna Sastri would have been less ready to give the start 
to the theory of Rajendra killing Rajaraja alter securing for him two 
crowns for three years, ARE. 1912 II 32. The word dhurtu in 


Rajendra’s pmsa^ti on which Krishna Sastri relies for this theory, has a 
variant reading drpla , and the compound in which it occuis must be 
referred to the word Papaya that follows, as was correctly done by 
Gopinatlia Rao in his Tamil history ol‘ the Colas, p. 114. It is obviously a 
reference to the tradition of the Papaya’s expedition against Indra. All 
the statements controverted here have been summarily accepted by 
Hr. S. K. Aiyangar, Mouth India and tier Muhammadan Invader a, pp. 35 — 41. 


0**64 of 1892. Let us note also the words: inaniikiUameQutta neximufjii 
siiQiyaruliya in 185 of 1908 (Yr. 4). In SIR vii. Appendix A, three 
records with a short pra&azti beginning pumiyum tiruvum are ascribed to 
Rajendra III; they belong in fact to the early years of Kulottunga 1, and 
in two of them Parakesari should be treated as a mistake for Rajakesari, 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 197 

Rajendra had gone some way to realise his ambitious 
programme of recovery. The evidence of Hoysala 
inscriptions renders it even probable that he entered 
on this task earlier than 124(j. The prasasti says that 
Rajendra avenged the humiliation put upon the Co}a 
power and that by his prowess he enabled Rajaraja to 
wear two crowns for three years. 68 In some redactions, 
the prasasti also states that Rajendra was expert in 
cutting oft the crowned head of the Pandya, 69 while an 
inscription from Tripurantakain, 79 dated in the fifteenth 
year, contains the more sober claim : iruvar pamdyar 
nitidittalai-kondartilina. Rajendra is also said to have 
plundered the Pandya country. It is clear that 
Rajendra gained some success against the Pandyas and 
that the second crown he claims to have bestowed on the 
Cola ruler was the Pandyan crown. 71 The Pandyas 
had carried fire and sword into the Cola country twice 
in twenty years and had been the cause of the rebellion 
of Kopperunjinga and his imprisonment of Rajaraja. 
Rajendra ’s anxiety to strike the first blow at them was 

**C6larkula-paribhava-nirakaruxia vikrama-tri-var^ardhdntanuikufti - 

dvaya-Rdjardja. 

c "Pand ydr?)i atii-makufarsi ra h - k h and an a- pa nqt i t a — 420 of 1911 ; 515 of 
1922. 

7t) 201 of 1905; for the meaning of talai-koyujia see above Vol. i, 
pp. 169-170. Cf. also Pandya-matii-makutti'PWia-praUHthitUrpadaravmda 
of 93 of 1897 and 515 of 1922. 

"Krishna Sastri says: 'the two crowns — perhaps those of the P&$<Jy& 
and the Kera)a\ ARE. 1912, II, 32. There is no mention of the Kerala 
except in the rhetorical claim that the Kerala and the Pandya held his 
fly-whisks: svar-vcsyd-MnMna-drpHi ((inui'tfOdYindya-Kcrala-vijijamdna' 
cd m ara-y iigaju. Moreover, if both the Pctpdy alJ Kerala crowns were 
bestowed on Rajaraja, these with his own Cola crown, would make three, 
not two as stated in the prasasti. 



198 


THE CO^AS 


therefore quite natural. But when did he get his 
chance, and why did the effect of his success not last for 
more than three years'? And who were the two Pandyan 
kings who had to own defeat at his hands ? Now it seems 
hardly likely that Rajendra achieved anything against 
the powerful Maravarman Sundara Pandya I. But 
after his death, until the accession of Jatavarman 
Sundara Pandya I in A.D. 1251, the Pandyan kingdom 
was held by weak rulers, and it is quite possible that 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya II (acc. 1238) was the 
king who was compelled for a time to acknowledge the 
Co] a overlordship. The identity of the other Pandya, 
perhaps co-ruler with Maravarman Sundara II, remains 
obscure. We are perfectly justified in assigning these 
events to the reign of Maravarman Sundara II, because 
he is known to have been a weak ruler, and in his reign, 
as in the earlier part of the reign of Rajaraja III Cola, 
the influence of the Hoysalas on the affairs of the 
kingdom is visibly on the increase. 72 This may be due 
to the same cause, the Hoysala protection afforded to its 
ruler against the aggressions of a more active and 
powerful neighbour. Yira Somesvara is called, in some 
Mysore records, Pandya - kula - samraksana - daksa - 
daksina-bhuja, 73 (the king) whose right arm is expert in 
protecting the dynasty of the Pandyas. About the same 
time, Somesvara is said to have defeated Rajendra on 

the field of battle and to have protected him when he 
sought refuge. 74 It is probably these facts that account 


"PK. p. 158. 
"EC. v, p. xxv. 
"EC. v. AK. 123. 



RAjARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 J99 

V 

also for some expressions found in Rajendra’s 
inscriptions . 78 

An inscription from Vedaranyam 70 states that in 
the twenty-fifth year of Rajaraja III, A.D. 1241, 
Singana Dandanayaka invaded that part of the Cola 
country, that the inroad led to the cessation of 
worship in a temple, and that some time later, the temple 
had to be reconsecrated at a cost of 50,000 kdsus. A 
duplicate inscription from Pudukkottah, 77 dated in 
A.D. 1245, mentions the capture some years before of 
Kana-nadu on behalf of Vina Somesvara by his dandar 
ndyaka Ravi-deva. We have thus sufficient evidence to 
show that after Rajendra came on the field, there was a 
change in the part played by the Hoysalas. When the 
Colas showed signs of recovery under the energetic 
leadership of Rajendra and the Pandyas w r ere, in their 
turn, somewhat weakening, the Hoysalas lent their 
support without any hesitation to the Pandyas, as 
against the Colas. The trend of Hoysala diplomacy 


rB A Srlrangam inscription of the eighth year, A.D. 1254, begins with 
the expression : Mdma-&dm€4vararpratikfila-kdla~danda/ this may mean 
either The rod of death against uncle Somegvara' or The rod of death 
to the enemies of uncle S6megvara\ The same ambiguity attaches, though 
perhaps in a less measure, to the similar expression in the Sanskrit 
pratiasti : KarunCita-r&ja pratikula-k&la-dan$a> Fortunately for us, another 
phrase in the Sanskrit praSasti settles the meaning in the sense that 
Rajendra was hostile to SOmegvara himself. That expression is : "giri- 
durga malla-Vira-S6m?Jmra-kar-dmiilcta-pdda-virdbharana, meaning : ‘on 
whose leg Vira-SomeSvara, the (wrestler against) capturer of hill-forts, 
put on the anklet of heroes/ It should be noted that the date of these 
transactions can only be roughly indicated to lie between A.D. 1238, the 
accession of M&yavarman Sundara II and 1253, the earliest known date 
of the pra^asti of Rajendra. AK. 123 contains two dates in A.D. 1234 
and 1236, but may have been engraved several years later; the dates refer 
to events narrated in the course of the record. 

T *501 of 1904 (Yr. 30). 

TT Pd. 340, 341— same as 387 of 1906; ARE, 1907 II 26. 



200 


THE COjiAS 


is plain. It was to keep the balance even between the 
Pandya and Cola powers, to encourage both to look to 
the Hoysalas for assistance in times of need and thus to 
secure for themselves a dominant place in the state- 
system of the south. Evidently, Rajendra was compelled 
to give up all claims to supremacy over the Pandyas 
after a period of three years, marked by some hard 
fighting in different areas. We have as yet no clear 
knowledge of the details . 78 

The growth of differences between Somesvara and 

the Colas on their Pandyan policy 
cscja Tikka. forced the latter to seek other allies 

. for themselves. The Telugu-Codas of 
Nellore had attained considerable power and were 
ruling over an extensive territory in the Nellore, 
Chingleput and Cuddapah districts. We have seen that 
these rulers were on the whole more friendly with the 
Cola monarehs of the south and ready to acknowledge 
their formal suzerain position.,. Tikkanrpati alias 
Gandagopala 70 was the contemporary ruler of Nellore 
and there is clear literary evidence of his friendship 
with the Colas and his hostility to the Hoysalas. In 
the introductory verses to his Nirvacanottara Bama- 
yanamu, Tikkana has given a fairly complete and sober 
account of the achievements of Tikka, the father of his 
patron Manmasiddha. Prom this account we learn 
that Tikka fought against Samburaja and other enemy 
mandalikas and that he compelled Kahci, Cedimandala 

"It may be noted that K5pperufijinga also calls himself Pdn$ya- 
ma^alarbthapam-sfitradMra, .and It is possible that he helped the 
P&pdy&n rulers also. 

"446 of 1919; ARE . 1920 II 65. 



KAJABAJA IIT AND BAJENDBA III, THE END 1216-1279 201 

and the Kadavapati to acknowledge his supremacy. 
The importance of these successes was that they checked 
the predatory activities of the turbulent Kopperuii- 
jinga and his confederates and thereby strengthened 
the position of the Cola monarch. The presence of 
Grandagopala ’s inscriptions dated about A.D. 1230 and 
later 80 in Kancipuram and its neighbourhood, and the 
fact that many of them are dated in the regnal year's 
of Rajaraja corroborate the statements of Tikkana 
Somayaji on the relations between Tikka and the Colas. 
The same poet also states expressly that Tikka subdued 
the Karnata ruler Somes vara and thereby easily 

established the Co]a in his position and earned for him- 
self the title Colasthapanacarya. This is again 
confirmed by a Hoysala inscription of S. 1162 
(A.D. 1240) 81 which mentions an expedition of Somes- 
vara against the Grandagopala. Once more the date 
of the Hoysala record indicates that. Rajendra’s activi- 
ties for the restoration of Co]a power were begun some 
years prior to his formal installation as heir-apparent. 
We thus see that the accession of a weak Pandyan ruler, 
the commencement of Rajendra’s campaign of recovery, 
the estrangement between the Colas and the Hoysalas, 
and the alliance of the Colas with the Telugu Codas 
all hang together and constitute a sort of a diplomatic 
revolution in the political condition of South India. 
In fact it was an age of rapid changes in the political 
map of South India. The particular phase that was 

“357 of 1919; 446 of 1919 and others. 

9 'EC. vi, Kd. 100. Vira SCmS&vam DPvanu Gati$a GOpdJana melS ctli 
na#edu. 

K— 26 



202 


THE CO^AS 


created by the advent of Rajendra and has just been des- 
cribed furnishes, it may be noted in passing, a very 
good example in practice of the diplomatic theory of the 
mandala developed in the scholastic treatises on Hindu 
polity. The Cola kingdom is surrounded by enemies 
on all sides, and its only ally is a ruler whose territory 
lies beyond that of a neighbouring enemy . 82 


Another of Rajendra ’s successes is described in his 

prasasti in the phrase : ‘ the very Rama 
to the prosperous Northern Lanka 
celebrated for its Vira-raksasa(s) \ This is clearly a 


Uttara LankS. 


reference to a campaign against the fiambuvarayas, 
some of whom called themselves Vlra-raksasa and who 
held sway in the region of North Arcot . 88 Tikkana 
Somayaji states that Tikkanrpati undertook expedi- 
tions against Samburaja and other hostile mandalikas 
before he established himself at Kaiiclpuram, and it is 


#s It may be doubted if the title C6}a-sth§,pan&ciirya which is applied 
to Vfra Sdmegvara has any real historical significance and if it is not 
simply a repetition of a title actually earned by his father. On the other 
hand, Tikkana's words are very clear about Tikkanppati and deserve to 
be cited: 

gambu-r&j&dH>ra5ast&ri-mapdalikamu jercl-ySladg k&ficipuramu | 

Cedi-mapdalamu gasigajesi K&<Javapati-nIyyakolupa<Je palacamunaku j[ 

* * * 

Kamal&pta-pratim&na-mtirti-yaguna-Karp&ta SOmSdu du- 
rdama-ddrgarvamu rilpu m&pi nijadarpambum pratijjthifici II- 
lameyifi-jOJuni bhOmipai nilipi Cdlasth&pan&c&rya-nk- 
mamu dakkangoni Tikkabhtivibhudu skmarthyambu cellimpa<J5|| 

Ketana, in his DaSakum&racaritra adds that Tikka levied tribute from the 
P£pdya (1:16). Can it be that his troops assisted Hftjgndra in his P&p<Jyan 
war? 

•*58 of 1908 (Kulo. Ill, Tr. 17). The Northern Lank& has no reference 
to the Lank&s of the Gddavari delta (ARE. 1912 II 32; 1913 II 43). but to 
M&vilangai, Pattuppdffu • p. 139, Pu^ananupi 1 Intr. p. ?l f 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 2 03 

quite possible that in the wars he co-operated with 
Rajendra in the restoration of Cola power. 

It is thus seen that the attempts of Rajendra 
met with a considerable measure of success and 
that for some years, between 1238 and 1250, the Cola 
power once more held its own against its enemies and 
‘feudatories’, thanks to the loyalty and co-operation of 
the Telugu Codas of Nellore. The attempt to put down 
the rising power of the Pandyas necessarily failed ; this 
would have been the case even if Somes vara had not 
gone to the aid of the Pandyas ; for the latter had always 
been too strong for the Colas even when the Cola empire 
was in the prime of its strength ; and from the time of 
Yikrama Co]a, their hold on the Pandya territory had 
been little more than nominal ; and now the Pandyas had 
the added prestige bom of their recent successes against 
their quondam suzerains. For the rest of it, however, 
Rajendra ’s achievement is sufficient justification for his 
being described in his prasasti as the ‘restorer of the 
race of Manu ’ and the ‘ ruler who avenged the humilia- 
tion of the Colas. ’ 

Kaiiclpuram does not figure among the conquests 
of Rajendra and it is worth while to notice briefly the 

fortunes of the city in this period. The 
Does of Kaisci. latest Cola records traceable here 

appear to be dated about A.D 1245, 8S1 * 
in the twenty-ninth year of Rajaraja III, and not a 
single record of Rajendra III is to be found in 
Kancipuram. On the other hand we find an inscrip- 
tion of Kakatiya G-anapati dated Tuesday, June 8, 


••*352 and 666 of 1919. 



204 


THE CO&AS 


1249 A.D. recording a large grant by one of his 
ministers Samanta Bhoja. 83b There is an inscription 
from Nandalur which, in spite of many gaps, clearly 
shows that Tikka ’s son, Manumasiddhi, and Ganapati 
were friends. 830 There is again a tradition that the 
great Telugu poet Tikkana secured the intercession of 
Ganapati in the affairs of the Telugu-Coda kingdom 
on behalf of Manumasidclha when he was sought to be 
kept out of the succession. 83 ' 1 We have not as yet any 
decisive evidence of the date of Ganapati ’s inter- 
ference, if he actually did interfere in the manner just 
mentioned. We may also note that some years later, 
when Jatavarman Sundara Pandya killed Ganda- 
gopala, i.e. Tikka, in battle and conquered the Telugu- 
Coda kingdom, he became master of Kanelpuram and 
Nellore, 83 ” and put Ganapati to flight. We may 
therefore suppose that Kiincipuram had for some years 
become part of the Telugu-Coda kingdom under Tikka, 
that he held it in nominal subjection to Rajaraja III 
in the beginning, and to Ganapati later on, until the 

xxi, pp. 197 ff. Another inscription, 2 of 1893, seems to be 
the Tamil version of the same transaction and bears a date exactly one 
week earlier, the astronomical details corresponding to Tuesday, June 1, 
1249 A.D. 

** c 580 of 1907. yah s&hayyam vidhitsub Gapapatinppates svecchaya 
samgaragre God&varyam sariti nrpatig-carmaya^tya nivptya | K&lingam 
svan Kalinganabhimukham-akarodekaviras-tad&nim 1 1 ARE. 1908 II 75. 

I am unable to trace the authority for Krishna Sastri’s statement: ‘The 

Kakatlya king Gapapati of Warangal made a dash, Just at this period, ' 
into the South; took K&ncI and was encamped on the island of 
§rirangam\ A8I. 1909*10, p. 155. 

* % *8idd&6wracaritra, cited by Vire&alingam, Lives of Telugu Poets 
(rev. ed.) Pt. i, pp. 89-92. 

***The order of expressions in his Sanskrit pfa£asti seems to be 
significant: Viragatrfagftp&la vipina-d&va-dahana, Kfificlpuravarfidhlfivara, 
Gapapati-haripafiardtUa, Nellfirapura-viracitarvirabhtpeka. SIL l v. 433. 

I am unable to share the doubts of Sewell about this expedition H1SL 
p. 165. 



RAJARAJA lit AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 2 05 


city was captured by the Pandyan invader. The Colas 
then did not long keep their hold on Kanci for which 
Kulottunga III had fought successfully in the latter 
part of his reign. With the rise of Kopperunjinga 
into independence, the Cola king must have found it 
difficult to maintain his power in Kanci and acquiesced 
in the virtual annexation of the city to the Telugu- 
Cocla kingdom. 

Their differences over the Pandyan policy resulted, 

R&jendra and as we have seen, in hostilities between 

the Hoysaias. the Colas and the Hoysalas in which the 

former were aided by the Telugu-Coda Tikka I; this 
seems to have been, however, only a passing 
phase ; the inscriptions of Somesvara imply the resump- 
tion of friendly relations between him and Rajendra, 
after a temporary estrangement, and this is confirmed 
by the inscriptions of Rajendra in which Hoysala 
officers figure as donors as in those of Rajaraja III . 84 
This friendship between the Colas and the Hoysalas was 
continued up to and even beyond the death of Somes- 
vara. Two inscriptions from Tiruecatturai 85 in the 
Tanjore District are of great significance in this regard ; 
one of them is dated in the tenth year of Vira 
Ramanatha, the successor of Somesvara in the southern 
half of the Hoysala kingdom, and records a sale 

“49 of 1913, 387 of 1903, 498 of 1902, 349 of 1919. The suggestion 
has been made (ARE. 1913 II 43) that the part taken by the officers of 
SbmSdvara in a local enquiry into temple affairs at Sivayam (49 of 1913) 
constitutes proof that S5m§§vara acknowledged the sovereign power of 
Rajendra. But this is very doubtful, especially if we recall the number of 
inscriptions of Rajaraja III in which the Hoysala officials appear. It in 
reasonable to infer the existence of friendly relations between the two 
powers. 

"207 and 208 of 1931. 



S506 


THE CO^AS 


of land effected in the twentieth year of Rajendra 
(A.D. 1265-6), while the other couples the fifteenth 
year of Ramanatha with the twenty-fifth of Rajendra. 
These records attest the closest possible alliance between 
the two rulers, if not actually their joint rule over the 
territory where the inscriptions are found. 80 

The reason for this close alliance between the Cola 

and Hoysala is doubtless to be found in 
P5 Bion an Expan the new danger from the South that 

threatened both. The accession of 
Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I, 1251 A. D., to the 
Pandyan throne brought on the stage one of the most 
famous warriors and conquerors of Southern India. 
Under him the second empire of the Pandyas attained 
its greatest splendour, and all the other powers of South 
India, up to the river Krsna and even beyond, felt the 
weight of his arm, the Hoysalas and the Colas being the 
first to do so. 87 The Pandyan ruler had achieved signal 
success against the Cola and the Hoysala before the 
seventh year of his reign, A.D. 1258; he had laid the 
Cola under tribute and compelled the Hoysala to seek 
safety by retiring to the Mysore plateau; and when 
Somesvara renewed the war, he was defeated and killed 
in a battle fought near Kannanur, A.D. 1264. Very soon 
after, he carried his arms across the territory of the 
Kadavas and Telugu-Codas, up to Nellore where he held 
a Virabhiseka. When the tide of Pandyan power was 
thus rising to its full height, Rajendra III and Vlra 
Ramanatha had to carry on anyhow without provoking 

•'ARE. 1931, II, 16. 

•'PK. pp. 160 ft. 



R-ijARAJA III AND RAjfiNDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 2 07 


the mighty conqueror and they must have been drawn 
more closely together by their common adversity. 


Very few inscriptions of Rajendra are found 
outside the Cola country proper, and none after his 
fifteenth year, A.D. 1261. An inscription of the 
thirteenth year A.D. 1259 from Nandaltirin Cuddapah, 
and another dated two years later from Tripuran- 
takam (Kurnool) are the last traces of a suzerainty 
that had long ceased to be more than nominal. 


The latest regnal year cited in the inscriptions of 

Rajendra is the thirty -third, corres- 
E "eign. RaJendra B ponding roughly to A.D. 1279. An 

undated inscription from Tirukkanna- 
puram 88 mentions a certain Semappillai called by the 
king * nammagan \ ‘our son’; but as this description is 
often applied to feudatories in Cola inscriptions, it 
is doubtful if Semapillai was really a son of 
Rajendra III. 88 He also figures as a feudatory of Vira 
Pandya. A queen of Rajendra is apparently men- 
tioned under the title Sola-kula-madeviyar in an 

* 

inscription from Tiruvennainallur about A.D. 3263. 90 
Rajendra apparently had few feudatories under him; 
a Sola-Gangan and a Kalappalan are the only names 
to be noted in this connection. 91 Gangaikonda-Cola- 
puram continued to be the capital, and God Nataraja 
of Cidambaram the istadevata of the king. 91 * 


•*515 Of 1922. 

•* Contra . ARB. 1923, II. 45. 

••427 of 1921. 

•*194 of 1926 ; 202 of 1908; 339 of 1925. 
•<•93 of 1897, 



208 


THE COLAS 


At the close of Rajendra’s reign, the Pandyan 
empire was at the height of its prosperity and had 
taken the place of the Cola empire in the eyes of foreign 
observers like the Chinese and the Arabs. There is no 
evidence that Rajendra was followed immediately by 
another Cola prince, so that the Cola kingdom was more 
completely absorbed in the Pandyan empire than the 
southern kingdom ever was in the Cola empire in the 
days of its glory. The name Cola-mandalam long sur- 
vived the Cola kingdom itself and was subsequently 
corrupted into Coromandel. Chieftains of later times 
sometimes claimed descent from the Colas either 
through branches of the Telugu-Coda dynasty or more 
directly from the Colas of the Tamil country. A certain 
Vira Saiva Vira Pratapa Cola Raja with many high- 
sounding titles is found ruling in the Bangalore district 
in S. 1223, A.D. 1301/' 2 About the same time Vira Coda 
and his son Vira Campa are found in the North Arcot 
District. 03 An otherwise unknown branch of Telugu 
Codas is represented in the Madras Museum plates of 
Bhaktiraja dated S. 1277. 04 Very much later, in 
A.D. 1481 and 1530 we find inscriptions in the island of 
iSrlrangam recording gifts by Valaka Kamaya and 
Cennaya Balaya, both bearing the characteristic 
Telugu-Coda title, Uraiyurpuravaradhlsvara. 1 * 5 The 
Colas are mentioned in the Kolinjivadi plates of 
Acyutadevaraya. 86 Among the latest references to 

••EG. lx, Bn. 96. 

•*3 of 1890; El. iii, pp. 70-2. 

•'JOB. v. pp. 128 ft. 

••30 of 1891; 56 of 1892. 

•• JBMrati , Anglrasa, Sr&va^a. 



RAJARAJA III AND RAJENDRA III, THE END 1216-1279 2 09 

chieftains of Cola extraction must be counted, an 
interesting record from Kumbakonam of the grant of 
two villages for worship and offerings to Adi- 
Kumbliesvara by Mahamandalesvara Gururaja Rudra- 
de va-iSol a-Mal laraj a in 6. 1470 (A.D. 1554). 97 


•*291 of 1927. Other references, rather vague, occur in Vijayanagar 
records — e.g. MAR. 1928, p. 61, 11. 7-8 of 44. 

K-27 



CHAPTER XVII 


THE GOVERNMENT OP THE COLA EMPIRE 
In this and the succeeding chapters, an attempt 

is made to describe the state of 

Introductory. 

government and society in the Cola 
country from the accession of Vijayalaya to the 
downfall of the Cola empire. Such a description 
must necessarily be very imperfect, as it has to be 
pieced together from scanty material, scattered over 
a wide area and as yet but little understood. 
Numerous as are the inscriptions, the task of 
interpreting them can hardly be said to have begun, and 

but for the access I had, by the courtesy of the 
Archaeological Survey of India, to the unpublished 
inscriptions in the epigraphist’s office at Madras, this 
survey should have remained even more meagre than 
it is. The deplorable lack of a settled chronology for 
the indigenous literature imposes a serious handicap on 
the student who seeks to use it in historical reconstruc- 
tion. Welcome as it is, the light shed on South Indian 
affairs by foreign travellers and chroniclers of this 
age is faint and flickering. Numismatics again 
offers us more problems than solutions ; and taking the 
area and duration of Cola rule into account, we may 
well say that the number and variety of Cola coins 
known to-day are almost inconsiderable. Fortunately, 
we seem to be in a better situation with regard to the 
monuments of the period, and there is no lack of 
authentic and valuable material for an appreciation of 



■THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO*A EMPIRE 2ll 

its architecture and sculpture. For the study of 
government and social life, however, as for that of 
political history, our primary source must remain 
epigraphy, aided by a cautious use of literary material. 

The historian of India must perhaps remain a 
stranger to the bracing effects of a consciousness that 

his is a study of continuous and progressive tendencies 
steadily working for the amelioration of his fellow-men. 
He cannot claim that in any sphere of human activity, 
whether it be in the production and conservation of 
wealth, in the creation and development of political 
organisation, or in devotion to the fine arts, or even in 
the pursuit of religious life and the practice of moral 
virtues, often held up as the differentia of Indian 
culture, there has been a steady advance through 
centuries towards a higher level of achievement. No 
country in the world, not even the most fortunate, has 
altogether escaped disorders and revolutions that have 
often rudely undone, for a time, the noble results of 
generations of civilised life and work. But the student 
of India’s past finds it hard to resist the impression 
that at some stage in her history there set in a rot 
which, spreading soon over all spheres of life, sapped 
its vitality and made for the continuous loss of her 
efficiency. Foreign domination, the ascendancy of 
caste, the pessimistic outlook on life started by 
Buddhism and perfected by the Vedanta, and other 
causes of an equally sweeping character have been 
brought forward as the possible sources Of decay. 
Even the earlier phase of the history of India, in 



212 


The colas 


which she was most herself, little dominated by the 
foreigner though by no means unwilling to absorb the 
good that he brought into her ken, and giving freely 
of the best in her to the rest of Asia without the 
least attempt at an enforced cultural, much less 
physical, domination of the lands enriched by her 
gifts, — even this phase of her history has often been 
viewed in the shadow of ideas generated by the decadent 
phase of her subsequent history. Caste was there, and 
.with it also Buddhism and the philosophy of the 
Vedanta; none of them, nor all of them taken together, 
did anything, at one time, to sap the foundations of 
national life and achievement; and much evidence lies 
to hand to show that, on the contrary, these and other 
features of Indian life were the results of 
earnest and, by all human standards, not unsuccessful 
efforts to solve pressing problems of social and 
intellectual life in a manner which, however in- 
consistent with our modem views on these subjects, 
appears then to have w r orked tolerably well towards 
the promotion of mutual understanding and good-will 
and contentment in a large section of the human 
race. ’ The history of the Cola empire belongs, 
on the whole, to this earlier and happier phase of 

India’s history, and we shall see that, in spite of much 
that appears primitive and even offensive to us, much 
greater things were accomplished by corporate and 
voluntary effort, a greater sense of social harmony 
prevailed, and a consciousness of active citizenship was 
more widespread when the Cola kings held their sway 
jn Southern India than in more recent times. 



‘THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA W M P TRE 


2i3 


The period covered by the following survey extends 
„ „ t over more than four centuries, circa 

Scope of this # ’ 

study of social A.D. 850-1270. Though, strictly speak- 

lifd 

ing, it should embrace the whole of 
Southern India including the Telugu country which 
was, for the bulk of the period, an appendage of the 
Cola empire, still the paucity of Cola records outside 
the Tamil country proper, and the existence of the 
records of many local dynasties in these areas which 
have not yet been as fully studied as they deserve, 
render it necessary to confine this survey primarily to 
the Tamil land. The history of the Eastern Calultyas 
for instance is a great chapter in the annals of the 
Telugus and their literature ; it is hardly possible to do 
justice to it in what is essentially a study in Tamil 
history. And what applies to the Telugu area applies 
also, though not perhaps in the same measure, to the 
Kerala and Karnata countries. Though these dis- 
tricts may find mention off and on, especially in the 
study of the administrative system of the Co]a empire 
which embraced them all alike, the following account 
of social life makes no claim to any approach to 
fullness with regard to these areas. 

(The form of government was now, as in the Sarigam 

age, monarchy. But there was little 
in common between the primitive and 
somewhat tribal chieftaincy of the earlier time and the 
almost Byzantine royalty of Rajaraja and his 
successors )\fcith its numerous palaces, officials and 

ceremonials and its majestic display of 
A monarchy. the concentrated resources of an exten- 
sive empire. It is inconceivable that 


Government. 



2l4 


THE COliAS 


little groups of roving bands with their tambourines 
and their danseuses could have strolled in a casual 
manner into the stately mansions of these mighty 
potentates and gaily accosted them to an hour or two of 
feast and song, as they did in an earlier age when the 
‘ Crowned King ’ of the Cola land shared with two 
other crowned heads some sort of primacy in a land 
studded with petty principalities held by a somewhat 
turbulent, but not uncultured, aristocracy. (Alter its 
recovery from the effects of the Rastrakuta inroad, the 
Co]a monarchy embraced the whole of Southern India 
and extended east to west from sea to sea, while its sway 
was bounded on the north by an irregular line from 
somewhere near Mangalore along the Tungabhadra 
and the Vengi frontier ;)f or Vengi was so closely con- 
nected with the Cola kingdom in the period 1000 to 1150 
or so, that, though its separate political existence 

continued throughout in all its vigour, for all practical 
purposes of inter-state diplomacy, it counted more or 
less as part of the Cola empire. The principal conquests 

of the Colas took place in the interval between the 
accession of Sundara Cola and that of Rajendra I, and 
mainly in the reign of the great Rajaraja. And as in 
his reign the Cola kingdom ceases t o be a small state and 
grows to imperial dimensions, the monarchy undergoes 
a corresponding transformation, and the king may be 
said now to become ‘Emperor’, ‘Cakravartigal’ 1 as he 
is occasionally called by his subjects, though in his 
official records he is still described only as ‘ Udaiyar ’, 

*This expression occurs even in some records of Parantaka I (e.g. 1 
and 2 of 1898). 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


215 


and not till much later is the title “Emperor of the 
Three Worlds” adopted or the queen mentioned 
along with the king in public documents as possessing 
the whole world . 2 Under Rajaraja also begins the 
system of prefacing the stone records of the reign 
with an account in set form of the chief occurrences of 
the reign . 3 This innovation may be said to have marked 
the consciousness of the change in the position of the 
monarch. Another symbol of the same consciousness 
might be found in the magnificent lithic temple of 
Rajarajesvara in Tanjavur which rose in the propor- 
tion and technique of its architecture as much above 
any other temple then known, as the Cola empire itself 
did above the earlier kingdoms of the south. 


The Capitals. 


tanjavur, the Tanjore of the modern maps, was 

the Tanjapurl chosen by Vijayalava for 
the seat of his new power and the abode 
of the goddess, Nisumbhasudani, that had vouchsafed 
him success in his enterprises. Though after the con- 
quest of the Pallava country, KancI became a sort of 
subsidiary capital in which the kings spent part of their 
time, Tanjavur maintained her position as the chief city 


•241 of 1927; 446 of 1918. The title Konerinmaikon<p.n (unequalled 
king) Is applied to Rajaraja himself in 1. 112 of the larger Leyden grant. 
See Anbil plates 1. 124 for KSndyinmai. 

*261 of 1023 and 225 of 1929 raise some doubt on this point. 
They both contain a prafasti beginning pitvi-nvcmgai vajara which is pure 
rhetoric and gives no incident which might furnish a clue to the identity 
of the king concerned. The first describes the monarch as Parakesari 
Tribhuvanacakravartin ParS,ntakad§va ; and the other calls him R&jakesari 
Cakravartin Par&ntakadeva, and both records bear the regnal year 9. 
They come respectively from Koyil-Tevarayan-pett&i (Tj.) and Tiruvatjat- 
tujral (SA). It does not seem likely that they belong either to Parantaka I 
or Parftntaka II. Pal eograph icall y , 261 of 1923 is earlier and may be 
assigned to the time of R8.jar8.ja I, while the other record is much later, 
pay 12th or eyep early 13th century* Ante i, p. 165, n. 



216 


THE CSLAS 


of the kingdom till it was eclipsed by the new city of 
Gangapurl, which with the vast tank in its neighbour- 
hood, the Cola-gangam, served for many centuries to 
commemorate the ambition and the vanity of Raja- 
raja’s warlike son, Rajendra. We have apparently no 
contemporary account of either of these cities.) From 
the hymns of Karuvurttevar celebrating the Raja- 
raj esvara and the Gangaikondaco] esvara temples in the 
two places, we learn only that Tanjore had a fort-wall 
and a deep moat surrounding it, and nothing whatsoever 
concerning the other city. The big bazaar of Gangai- 
kondacolapuram, and the palace £o]a-]:ernlan in it are, 
however, mentioned in the inscriptions of the period , 4 
besides the servants of the bathing establishment of the 
king (tiriimanjanattarvelam) attached to the palace . 8 
Palaiyaru, near Kumbakonam, which contained a temple 
called Arumolideva-Isvara after Rajaraja’s name , 0 
seems to have contained a palace which was the favourite 

residence of Rajaraja’s sister Kundavai, and for 
some time of Rajaraja himself. A small hamlet near 
Palaiyaru even now preserves the name Aola-maligai 
within about four miles of the Kumbakonam railway 
station, and a small ruined temple there is said still to 
mark the site of the ancient palace of which it served as 
the guardian angel . 7 It has been pointed out before 
that Rajendra I built a palace of huge dimensions at 
Madura, and other places like Uttaramerur also have 
traditions of Cola palaces having existed in them. 

•811. li 20. 102 of 1926; 182 of 1916. 

•510 of 1926; 121 of 1914. 

•167 of 1908. 

* ARA . 1909-10, p. 16. 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE CO^A EMPIRE 


217 


About Tanjavtir, the original capital of Vijayalaya 

and his successors, we learn more from 

TaflJavQr. 7 

the inscriptions of the period than about 
any other city. The Big Temple, the most remarkable 
monument of Rajaraja’s reign, was nearing completion 
about A.D. 1010; it is not possible to decide how long 
before that date its construction was begun. Though the 
king’s order for engraving on the walls of the temple 
his gifts to it and those from others was issued early 
in his twenty-sixth year, A.D. 1011, it seems hardly 
likely that the work of actual engraving started till 
nearly three years later. 8 Besides a number of royal 
palaces inside the erty and in its vicinity, and the resi- 
dence of palace-servants divided into a number of 
velams, 9 we find the names of a large number of streets 
and quarters of the city mentioned in the records. 
The big street of Virasola, the big bazaar of 
Tribhuvana-mahadeviyar, are mentioned in inscriptions 
of an earlier date than the reign of Rajaraja. 10 In 
that reign a distinction comes up between the 
inner ( idlalai ) and the outer ( purambadi ) city, 
and it seems possible that the Purambadi was 
of the nature of ail extension, a new city, 
planned and for the most part built in the reign of 
Rajaraja himself, though the big bazaar named above 
had been in existence for some time already. 11 It is 

*8U. li, Introd . , pp. 14-5. 

•K6yil, 81 J. ii, 1; CitrakQta palace — 73 of 1923; Puramba^imajlgai— 
Leyden grant 1. 116. For the V§Jams of Tanjore see 241 of 1926; 226 of 

1911; 226 of 1911; SII. ii, 94 and 95; 401 of 1921; 142 of 1919 and other 

references. f 

10 49 of 1897; 241 of 1923. 

11 For names see 8IL ii, 94. 

K— 28 



218 


THE COjiAS 


perhaps noteworthy that among the new streets consti- 
tuted in Rajaraja’s reign were two running East to 
W est, perhaps in front of the big temple, and known as 
the Northern and Southern Talicceris, — both of them 
given over entirely to the occupation of four hundred 
hetaerae who were impressed into the service of the 
big temple from the various other temples of the king- 
dom, and whose names are preserved to us with the door 
numbers of the houses occupied by them . 12 We also 
learn incidentally of other temples in the city called the 
Jayabhima temple and the temple of Tanjui-mamani. 
And there was a hospital attached to a Yisnu temple 
called after Rajaraja’s father Sundara-colavinnagar- 
atula-salai and endowed by his sister Kundavai . 18 
Altogether the impression we get is that of a rich, well- 
provided and progressive city whose life was doubtless 
dominated by the temple and the court. 

(The royal household comprised numerous servants 

of various descriptions including body- 

Royal Household. n 

guards of sorts. Several gToups of 
Parivaras are mentioned and distinguished from one 
another by their individual names formed from the 
surnames of the kings ; 14 that these groups served also 
as body-guards is clear from their being described occa- 
sionally as Tirumeykappar. The bath-room and kitchen 
establishments would seem to have been composed more 
or less exclusively of women. The palace servants were 
organised into velavns and settled in separate quarters 


"SU. ii, 66. 

”248 and 249 of 1923. 
"BII. 11, 1L 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE CO^A EMPIRE 


219 


in the cities of Tanjore and Gangaikondasolapuram ; 15 
these velams were often recruited from the men and 
women captured in war/) We have to look upon this 
crowd of personal servants as in the enjoyment of a fair 
competence in return for generally very light work ; the 
status of the members of the velams was perhaps that 
of a not unpleasant servitude to which the less sensitive 
among them might have reconciled themselves in a short 
time. 

“At state banquets”, we read in Chau «Tu-kua, 
on the Cola Dominion , 10 “both the Prince and four 
Court Ministers salaam at the foot of the throne, then 
the whole (company present) break into mlisic, song 
and dancing. He (the Prince) does not drink wine, 
but he eats meat, and, as is the native custom, dresses in 
cotton clothing and eats flour-cakes. For his table and 
escort he employs ‘ fully a myriad dancing-girls, 
three thousand of whom are in attendance daily in 
rotation . 1 ’ ’ 

(Apparently each important member of the royal 
family had his own entourage of such personal 
attendants j^this is seen from such expressions in the 
inscriptions as: “In the particular service ( tanic - 
ccvagam ) of IXdaiyar Kodandarama, ” “the Satru- 
bhayankarat-terinda-velam of Paiicavan Mahadevi- 
yar ” 17 and so on.^The king, his queens and their nume- 
rous relatives set the example, so generally followed 

16 We gather about twenty names of velams from the inscriptions of 
the period from Par&ntaka I to Rajendra II. See, e.g., 241 of 1926; 225 
and 226 of 1911; 240 of 1894; 627 of 1909; 340 of 1927; 8IL ii, 94 and 95; 
212 of 1911; 401 of 1921; 323 of 1927; 142 of 1919; 121 of 1914; 63 and 64 
of 1928, We have mention also of TaQimdrum KudiraiccSvagar in 459 of 
1918. 

”Chau Ju-kua, p. 95. 

”342 of 1907, 62 of 1928. 



220 


THE CO^AS 


by the official nobility, the merchants and other well- 
to-do classes of society, of erecting temples and 
endowing them' on a liberal scale, and spending consi- 
derable sums of money on the reclamation of land, 
promotion of irrigation works, maintenance of schools 
and hospitals and other useful works. J In order to be 
able properly to comprehend the loving regard and 
affection which generally actuated the feelings of the 
people towards their rulers of various grades, we must 
take account, among other things, of the generous 
measure in which much that was collected from the 
people by way of numerous taxes, aids and dues was 
returned to them in the form of charitable endowments. 
►Such endowments formed indeed an essential feature of 
national economy, and it is important to grasp the signi- 
ficance, political and social, of the lead given by the 
court in this respect. 

(One circumstance worthy of some attention is the 
paucity of references to Vedic sacrifices performed by 
the monarchs of the period. The asvamedha occurs 
only once and that in the inscriptions of Rajadhiraja. 

The poems of the Sangam age doubtless 
D ySfi P a referred t0 irapty that such costly Vedic rituals 

were more common in that age. More 
emphasis seems to be laid in this period on dcina, gift, in 
preference to yaga, sacrifice.} Occasions for such gifts 
are multiplied not only by the elaborate organisation of 
temples and worship in them, and the studied effort to 
group all social amenities round the temple as a nucleus, 
but by the newer means of obtaining religious merit 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO^A. EMPIRE 


221 


enjoined on the rich in general, and on royalty in parti- 
cular, such as the tuldbhara, the hiranyagarbha and so 
forth. It is one of the most remarkable achievements 
of mediaeval Hinduism to have harnessed the religious 
emotions of man in the effective service of society. The 
temple and the vmtha flouri shin g on dma . (gifts) 
together with the agrahura, the caturvedimangalam of 
tlie Cola inscriptions, are the most typical expressions 
of this phase of South Indian religion. The Jain 

pallis and the Bauddha vihdfas also derived benefit 
from this general movement. 


R&ja>guru. 


(That the Cola monarchs were staunch Saivas in 

their religious persuasion is a well 
established fact. Saivism, like many 
other sectarian manifestations of latter-day Hind uism, 
required its followers to obtain initiation from a guru; 

the Coja kings no doubt followed this rule and there 
must have been in existence a succession of raja-gurus 
during the whole period of Cola rule.) The names 
of Isana Siva and Sarva Siva stand out from the 
inscriptions of the reigns of Rajaraja I and Rajendra, 
and bear testimony to the North Indian connections 
of the Saivism of the Cola Court. A guru-devar 
revered by the king as his spiritual preceptor is men- 
tioned in an inscription of Rajadhiraja I . 18 Another 
raja-guru is mentioned by a Mysore inscription of the 
reign of Kulottunga I which records that the king fol- 
lowed the advice of the guru in granting a Brahmadeya 


"413 of 1902. 



222 


THE CO^AS 


to 108 caturvedibhattas .™ . And the position held by 
udaiyar Svamidevar in the reign of Kulottunga IH 
shows that the guru generally acted as the king’s 
adviser in the administration of religious institutions ; 
Svamidevar, for instance, disapproved of certain dis- 
positions made by the king regarding the conduct of 
worship in the temples at Tirukkadaiyur on the death 
of one of the priests ; when the king came to know of it, 
he revised his orders and appointed the men recom- 
mended by Svamidevar as having a just claim to the 
place. 


^Several temples of the period, and often also the 

Temples assepui- c ^ief icons in them, were called after 
chrai monu- the ruling kings who established them. 

lUvlllSi 

The worship accorded to idols called 
sometimes after living monarchs seems to have been 
connected with the apotheosis of royal personages after 
their demise. This practice in the form of the cult of 
Devaraja, ‘God-king’, was even more widespread in the 
Indian archipelago and the contemporary kingdoms of 


the Indo-chinese peninsula than in Southern India. 20 
More closely allied to Saivism than any other form of 


Hinduism, the prevalence in the C’o]a country of the 
notions that gave rise to the cult of Deva-raja is 
attested by inscriptions which mention the construction 
of sepulchral temples over the remains of kings and 
princes.); The Adityesvara at Tondamanad erected as 
a pattipadai to his father by Parantaka I, 21 the 


••MAR. 1917, pp. 42-4. 

••Maspero — L'lndochine I, p. 260. 
*>230 0 £ 1903. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 223 

Arinjigai-Isvara at Melpadi built by Rajaraja I like- 
wise to commemorate Arifijaya who died at Arrur , 22 
and the Paneavanmadevisvara in Ramanathan Koyil 
apparently erected by Rajendra I 23 are among the most 
conspicuous examples of this practice. The existence 
of human bones underneath the Sanctum Sanctorum in 
several temples has been revealed in recent times when 
their renovation was started ; 24 and the growing 
disapproval of this practice in later times is shown by 
the attempt to erase the word 4 pallipadai ’ in the 
inscription at Ramanathankoyil just referred to . 25 

An image of Sundaracoja Parantaka II is said to 

have been set up in the temple at 

Portrait images* w _ , , „ . 

Tan j ore and arrangements made for its 
worship by his daughter Kundavai who also endowed 
another image either of herself or her mother in the 
same place . 20 There were also images of Rajaraja and 
his queen Lokamaliadevi . 27 The temple in the village 
of Sembiyanmahadevi, so called after the pious queen of 
Gandaraditya, contained an image of the queen, like- 
wise regularly worshipped . 28 Inscribed images of a 

more or less authentic character supposed to represent 

« 

Rajendra and Colamahadevi are found to day in the 
temples of Tanjore and Kalahasti . 29 These examples 

••SII. ill, i«. 

**271 Of 1927. 

•*ARA. 1915-16, p. 34. 

••ARB. 1927, II, 13. 

••SH. 11, 6, paragraphs 14 and 19. The latter has Tammai dga 
elundaruluvltta HrumSni. 

*•811. 11, 88— paras 14, 17. 

*•481 of 1925. 

••ARE. 1925 II, 12; and 168b of 1922. Cf. Bh5sa’s Pratirnd-ndfaka 
and El. xxl, pp. 4-5. 



224 


THE CO{jAS 


are enough to establish the divine honours accorded to 
royal personages after death, and sometimes in their 
lifetime. 


[The king was the head of the army and the navy. 

The Army. Numerous regiments of the army are 

" ==3= * mentioned by their specific names in the 

inscriptions. One remarkable feature of the army 
brought out by these records is that each of these regi- 
ments had a corporate life of its own and was free to 
endow benefactions or build temples in its own name. 
Sometimes individuals still in service adopted the 
same course.} And we come to know the names of these 
regiments mid individuals from the records of such 
transactions. In fact we learn more of the part 
taken by the forces of the king in the civil life of 
the country than of the details of their military life 
and organisation. The names of over thirty regiments 
mentioned in Raj a raja’s inscriptions have been 
collected by Yenkayya and the list can easily be extended 
to about seventy by adding to it names that can 
be drawn from the records of other reigns before and 
after Rajaraja. Each of these names clearly commemo- 
rated the time when the regiment was constituted, and 
it possibly recalled, to the minds of contemporaries, 
the exact occasion for it; many surnames otherwise 
unknown of the kings of the period are preserved in this 
manner — Parthivasekhara, Samarakesari, Vikrama- 
£inga, Tayatonga, Danatonga, Candaparakrania, 
Rajakunjara and so on. These (names of regiments 
constitute evidence of the gradual growth of the army 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO(A EMPIRE 


m 


in the early days-of Cola expansion and to some extent 
also of the nature of the different sections of it. We 
hear for instance of the elephant corps (dnaiydtkal, 
kunjiramallar etc.,) the cavalry (kudiraiccevagar ) , 
and several divisions among the infantry^ The Kaik- 
kolapperumbadai , 30 the great troops of kaikkolas, 
included all the regiments known as Kaikkolar. This 
name has sometimes been interpreted in its modern 
meaning of ‘weavers ’; 31 but the term has a more 
literal meaning in the contexts in which it occurs in 
the Cola inscriptions; it indicates ‘(a class of) men 
distinguished by the strength of their arms’, or ‘the 
strong men of the wings (of the army),’ that is, 
soldiers of the infantry division in the army. Then 
there were regiments of bowmen ( villigal ) and 
swordsmen ( valperra kaikkolar). The velaikkdrar of 
the valangai (Right-hand), — we do not hear of 
Idangai (Left-hand) in this connection, — were another 
large section comprising several regiments. The con- 
jecture has been made that these were volunteers 

enlisted on particular occasions ( velai) , 32 This seems to 
be, however, wide of the mark. In fact, the velaikkdrar 
were the most permanent and dependable troops in the 
royal service, and their designation implies that they 
were ever ready to defend the king and his cause when 
occasion (velai) arose. This view is supported by some 
literary references of a somewhat later date . 33 Perhaps 

”253 of 1907. 

•'Sll. ii, p. 390, n. 6; ARE. 1919, II, 10. 

”«//. li, Introd. p. 10. 

tt EI. xviii, p. 334., Cf. also the tiruccitla-velaikk&rar of Pufijai who 
sacrificed their lives by entering fire to attest the ownership of the temple 
in some ddvaddna lands. (188 of 1825). See also Ibn Battuta Tr. by 
H. A. R. Gibb, (Broadway Travellers), pp. 277-8. 



226 


THE CdfeAS 


closely analogous to the velaikkarar in organisation 

and purpose were the Tennavan-Apattudavign] found 
in the service of the later Pandya kings of whom Marco 
Polo says that they kept always near the king and had 
great authority in the kingdom . 34 The distinction 
between Sirudanam and Perundanam seems to have cut 
across the other divisions so far mentioned. Sometimes, 
regiments were distinguished by territorial names like 
Pandip-padai . 35 

A unique inscription from Tiruvalisvaram near 
Ambasamudram in the Tinnevelly district furnishes 
the military history of a regiment which calls itself 
Munrukai-Mahasenai (the Great Army of the Three 
Arms or sections ). 36 Undated though it is, there can 
be no doubt that the record belongs to the period of 
Rajaraja I and Rajendra I. In this inscription the 
Mahasenai is said to have constantly worshipped 

Visnu and Siva, to have defeated the Kannara and 
pursued him, to have killed the Gangeya, to have 
captured Kalmadam and destroyed Vilinam on the 
sea, to have crossed the sea on the other (eastern) 
side and razed Matottam to the ground, to have 
taken the Hill country (Malai-nadu) and routed 
the fleet ( Kalamaruttu ) at Salai, to have put to 
flight the Vallan (Calukya) and captured Vanavasi 
and to have been praised in song for these achievements 
by the Tamil poets of Kalahasti, to have also destroyed 

* 4 PK. pp. 196-7. See also Abu Zaid's curious account in Ferrand- 
Voyage du Marchand Arabe Sulayman, p. 114. 

*•25 5 of 1911. 

*•120 of 1905. See EL xviil, pp. 334-6 for a similar record from 
Ceylon of a Inter data* 



227 


THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO(jA EMPIRE 

the fortress on the hill of Kucci and captured Uccandi 
(Uccangidroog), to have inflicted a defeat on the 
Vadugas (Northerners) who opposed them, and dis- 
mantled the fortifications of Vatapi and done other 
things which, on account of a gap in the record, are not 
easy to follow. The army is also called — the residents 
of Pandi-nadu, the dauntless soldiers of the Great 
Army of the Three Arms- They took under their eter- 
nal protection the Temple of Tiruvallsvaram and all its 
belongings, including its priests and servants. It is 
evident that the campaigns in which this regiment 
claims to have fought with such glory were those of the 
reigns of Rajaraja and his successor. The same regi- 
ment again proclaims its ideals of heroism in an 

inscription from Sermadevi in A.D. 1096 ST and solemnly 
takes under its protection another temple and its 
properties; here the regiment is called: ‘the several 
armed thousands of' the great army of the three 
divisions ( kai').’ 

Arhe army seems to have been spread over the 
country in the form of local garrisons and in canton- 
ments ealled kadagams. Expressions like the villigal 
(bowmen) of Enanallur-kadagam, 88 the troops quar- 
tered in Tiruvidaimarudil, 39 Iwurp-padait-talaivan 
(the Captain of the troops in this town) 40 are clear 
indications of the practice mentioned.) After his 
southern campaigns, Kulottunga I stationed an army 
in Kottaru, and established military colonies along the 

*'189 of 1895. 

*'894 of 1981. 

*•248 of 1997. 

"TAB. iv, pp. 184-5. 



228 


TBtE CO^AS 


road from the Cola country to that place . 41 A 
section of the army was posted in Madavilagam in South 
Arcot in the forty-sixth year of the same king . 42 

We can form no idea of the methods of' recruitment 
or of the numbers of the troops permanently employed 
in the army. It is remarkable that many of the leaders 
(senapatis) in the army were of Brahmin extraction 
and when sufficiently distinguished bore the title 
Brahmadhiraja. The children bom and bred in the 
velams 43 seem to have formed a normal recruiting 
ground for the army, though they could not have 
furnished more than a small proportion in it. There is 
little evidence that the soldiers formed anything like a 
highly trained professional army having little or 
nothing in common with the civil population. On the 
other hand, the evidence is clear that they were not a 
mere rabble beaten up for particular occasions with no 
training in the military arts and no taste for the field. 
An army which included regiments like the Munrukai 
Mahasenai with cherished traditions of their own could 
hardly have been recruited or maintained in that 
manner. The mention of kadagams (cantonments) also 
goes to show that periodical training in military 
practice and the enforcement of discipline were not 
altogether unknown to the military department of the 
Cola government. But there is much to show that the 
army was deeply interested in the civil transactions of 
life, and that its sections acted in many ways like the 


tl TA8. i, p. 246, 811. lit. 69, 11. 27-29. 
”289 of 1925. 

“627 Of 1909, ARE. 1910, II 19. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO^A EMPIRE 


229 


innumerable local corporations of a professional or 
territorial character of which we shall have to speak in 
detail later. The numerous charitable endowments 
made by them as groups and by their individual mem- 
bers, and the protection of the Tiruvalisvaram temple 
undertaken by the Munrukai-Mahasenai have already 
been mentioned. We find three regiments of the 
Kaikkolappadai of Rajaraja 1 44 co-operating with a 
revenue official ( nddu vagai ) at Somur in imposing and 
realising a fine levied on the authorities of the local 
temple for their default in not organising a procession 
of the image of the goddess on the occasion of a solar 
eclipse. Later Cola inscriptions from Kudumiyamalai 
in the Pudukkottah state mention two divisions of the 
army interesting themselves in civic affairs. In the 
thirty-sixth year of Kulottunga I (A.D. 1106), the 
munru-padaip-porkoyil Kaikkolar and the nattup- 
paclai paliyili ainnurruvar undertake to co-operate with 
the assembly of the nudu in maintaining a charitable 
endowment made in favour of the local temple. 45 Again, 
in the year 1213, the Kaikkolar mentioned above are 
described as stationed in Konadu and undertake to pro- 
vide for the celebration of a number of festivals every 
year in the same temple. 46 It must be noted, inci- 
dentally, that the two divisions of the army here 
mentioned appear to have constituted two out of the 
four kinds of troops prescribed in the books on Indian 
polity — hereditary (mania), mercenary ( hhrtaka ), 
militia ( sreni ), and tribal ( atavi ). The kaikkolar 

“67 of 1890. 

“363 of 1904. 

“364 of 1906. 



230 


THE CO^iAS 


were perhaps royal troops receiving regular pay from 
the treasury ; the nattwppadai was the popular militia, 
called srent or jdnapada by Kautilya, and employed 

perhaps only for local defence. 47 Who the faultless 500 
(. paUyili ainnurrimar ) were and what relation they 
bore to the rest of the ndttuppadai, it is not possible to 
say. 

Almost to the end of the period of Cola power the 
composition of the army and its role in the civil life of 
the community apparently continued to remain the 
same as at the beginning. In the reign of Rajaraja III, 
a member of the regiment called Narasinga Vikkirama 
Yirar built a temple at Pulivay (Chingleput) and made 
some gifts to it. 48 

I A Chinese author, writing in 1178, gives the 
following account of the Cola country and its 
army : 49 “ This country is at war with the kingdoms 
of the West (of India ?). The government owns 
sixty thousand war-elephants, every one seven or 
eight feet (cubits ?) high. When fighting, these 
elephants carry on their backs houses, and these 
houses are full of soldiers who shoot arrows at 
long range, and fight with spears at close quarters. 
When victorious, the elephants are granted honorary 
names to signalize their merit, and there are some who 
bestow upon them embroidered housings and golden 
mangers. Every day the elephants are taken into the 
presence of the king.”^ 

41 Kural 762 and Parimel-ajagar thereon; Kautilya, Adhi. ix ( ch. 2. 

“159 of 1923. 

“Cited by Chau Ju-kua, p. 96; also p. 100, n. 8. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COLA EMPIRE 


231 


The idyllic view of war which makes it a joust 


Effects of Wars. 


among professionals interfering little 
with the normal life of the neighbour- 


hood gains no support from our sources. From 
them war is seen to be a grim business of five 
and sword; and, to judge from the inscriptions of the 
Colas themselves, no less than of their enemies, the 
Calukyas, life was made an intolerable burden for many 
generations to the people on either side of the 
Tungabhadra by the bitterness of warfare. Even 
the common rules of fair fighting and chivalry 
seem often to have been ignored and much wanton 
injury inflicted on non-combatant populations, and 
women subjected to cruel disgrace and mutila- 
tion. The evidence from Ceylon and the Kamatak 
is too glaring to be set aside or glossed over. 
The destruction of temples of which Rajendra I is 
accused in a Calukya inscription was no doubt due in 
part to religious differences and in part to cupidity; 
Rajendra was a Saiva and the temples were richly 


endowed Jaina bastis in the enemy country and 
were fair game. The amount of booty that fell into the 
hands of the Colas as a result of foreign war must have 


been enormous, and the Cola inscriptions make no 
secret of the benefactions of the monarchs being often 
only the bestowal of plundered wealth on public insti- 
tutions . 80 The booty captured in war belonged to the 
king who disposed of it at his will. In his sixth year, 
Rajaraja I ordered that nine hundred sheep captured 
from Sippuli and Paki nadus were to be employed 


"See ag. £77. It, 91 axMl 93, 



232 


THE CO^AS 


in endowing ten lamps in his own name in the 
temple of Durga at Kanclpuram . 51 Again, we find an 
officer petitioning the king for the gift of one of the 
icons brought after the conquest of Malanad, and 
obtaining, as a result, an image of Marakatadevar which 
he installed at Tiruppalanam soon after . 83 

(The ‘numberless ships’ which carried Rajendra’s 

troops across the ‘rolling sea’ to the 

The Njivy » 

conquest of Sri-vijaya and its dependen- 
cies could not have com'e up suddenly and must be 
accepted as proof of a steady naval policy pursued by 
the Cola monarchs of the period. The early Cd]as of 
the Sangam period had a good share in the maritime 
trade and activity of the Indian seasA The history of 
the Hindu colonies in the Malay archipelago and 
Indo-China gives clear evidence of a steady increase, 
under the Pallavas, in the trade and culture contacts 
between these lands and the countries of South India. 
The Tamil inscription 53 of Takuapa (Siam) shows that 
an important mercantile corporation of South India, the 
manigramam, had established itself on the opposite 
coast of the Bay of Bengal in the ninth century A.D. 
The Colas only continued an ancient tradition in the 
attention they gave to developing their power on the 
sea. The conquest, of Ceylon and the Maldives, and the 
evidence of the Chinese annals on the embassies that 
reached China in this period from the Cola country give 
us some measure of the success they attained in this 

*>79 Of 1921. 

•*135 of 1928. 

••JOB. vi. pp. 299 If. 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE COL.A EMPIRE 


233 


direction. And the overthrow of the Cera fleet at 
Kandalur Salai may well be taken to mark the definite 
establishment of Cola naval power in this period in the 
territorial waters of Southern India, We have little 
direct evidence on the build of the ships employed. 
Considering that the author of the Periplus distin- 
guished three types of vessels several centuries earlier 
on the Coromandel coast and that the naval expedition 
of Rajendra was a great achievement in itself, the 
existence of a well-ordered fleet comprising ships and 
boats of different grades must be admitted. The Arab 
merchant Sulaiman made several voyages between 
China and the Persian Gulf in the ninth century A.D., 
at a time when this long distance trade was being carried 
on very briskly. In his curious account of the Maldives, 
he says that the people of these islands “built ships and 
houses and executed all other works with a consummate 
art.” 54 Sulaiman had no occasion to visit the 
Coromandel coast; and his voyages were made before 
the rise of the Colas of the Vijayalaya line into promi- 
nence. Taking into account Sulaiman ’s testimony to 
the quality of the ships built in the Maldives, and the 
conquest of these islands effected by Rajaraja’s fleet, 
we may form some idea of the efficiency of the Cola navy 
in this period. Abu Zaid Hasan, in the notes which he 
added to Sulaiman ’s work about the beginning of the 
tenth century A.D., observes that the vessels of the 
In dian ocean, specially those made at Siraf , differed in 
construction from those of the Mediterranean. “ It is a 

84 Ferrand, Voyage, p. 32. Wilson, Persian Gulf , pp. 57-8 and n . 
Pelliot casts a doubt on Sulalman’s authorship of the work attributed io 
him, T*oung Pao t xxi, pp. 401-2. 

K— 30 



234 


THE CO^AS 


fact, that the type of ship built by pieces of wood sewn 
together is a speciality of the builders of Siraf ; the 
ship-builders of Syria and of Rum (Byzantium) nail, 

on the contrary, these pieces of wood and never sew them 
one to the other.” 05 To-day we can see boats on the 
Madras coast with planks ‘sewn’ together by threads of 
cocoanut fibre. But these are usually of a small size ; 
and the observations of 1 Abu Zaid based on what he saw 
and heard at Siraf about A.D. 916 on navigation in the 
Indian ocean 50 should be no obstacle to a just estimate 
of the size and importance of the navy of the Cola 
empire more than a century later. If the Arab writers 
are too early, Marco Polo comes unfortunately too late, 
and we are without a good contemporary account of 
ship-building on the Coromandel coast under the Colas. 
Ahmad-ibn Majid, an Arab writer of the fifteenth 
century and author of several nautical works, makes 
frequent allusion to the opinions of the Colas which he 
approves or modifies. He must have had before him a 
specialised nautical literature of Tamil (Cola) origin 
which he compared with Arab documents of a like 
nature. This literature must have included geo- 
graphical tables with indications of the latitude of ports 
for the use of the mariners of the Coromandel coast. 57 
Of this technical literature mentioned by this and other 
Arab writers, unfortunately no part seems to have 
survived. 

••Ferrand, op. cit. f p. 93. See also Benadout — Ancient Accounts— 
Bemark ‘E*, and Marco Polo. 

••Ferrand -Voyage, 14. 

8 T “Dans tous ses ouvrages nautiques, Ibn Majid fait frdquemment 
allusion k V opinion des Colas qu'il approuve ou rectifle. Ce'st qu’il devait 
avoir en main les Instructions nautiques et les tables gdographiques avec 
indication de la latitude des ports, utilisdes par les marins du Coromandel 
et qu’il les comparait avec les documents arabes de m©me nature.” 
Ferrand, JA. 11: 14, (1919) pp. 171-2. 



*THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO^A EMPIRE 



(The king’s share in the public administration 
J The gin g consisted in the issue of oral orders 

( tiruvayk-kelyi ) on representations 
made to him by responsible officials on particular 
matters requiring the personal attention of the 
sovereign; officials were always in attendance on such 
occasions and it was their duty to make a 
note of the terms of the -petition made to the king and 
his orders thereon, and to transmit copies of such 
records to the authorities of the central or local 
administration concerned for necessary action. The 
tim’e and place of the original petition, the name of the , 
officer who presented it, and even the particular hall 
or throne where the monarch received the petition were 
often noted in reciting the order for being recorded in 
public places, usually the walls of temples.', Rajaraja, 
for instance, is said in the larger Leyden grant to have 
ordered the gift of Anaiinangalam to the palli (temple) 
of the Sulamani-padma-vihara while he was sitting in 
the hall to the south of his palace called Rajasraya 
in the outer city (purambadi) of Tanjavur; and the 
order was written out by a clerk, — nam solid nam olai 
eludum . . . . Amudan-tirttakaran eluttindl . 5S Other in- 

M •• 

stances may be easily gathered and sometimes the same 
form is adopted in the records of the Cola-Pandya 
viceroys, who were invariably members of the royal 
family . 50 Most of these examples relate, however, to 
gifts in one form or another; though it does not seem 
likely that the method of dealing with other matters 


** ASST . iv. pp. 208-9. 11. 116 and 128. 

"114 o f 1896; 420 of 192S; 327 of 1916; TAS. 1, pp. 164-8, etc. 



236 


THE COliAS 


differed very much, the very one-sided character of the 
inscriptions makes it difficult to prove this conclusively. 


rahere is no definite evidence of the existence of a 
council of ministers or of other officers connected with 
the central government. A numerous and powerful 
"Bureaucracy assisted the king in the tasks of 
administration, which were those of controlling, 

H *** V. * 

supervising and regulating an existing order, changing 

it, if at all, only by imperceptible 
state and society, steps. No government of an Indian 

state ever enjoyed in those days legis- 
lative power in the modern sense of the term; there 


was no legislature proper, nor any attempt at 
legislative control of the executive. What legislation 
there was took the form of declarations ( Vyavasthas ) 
by local associations of sorts, meant to meet 
the requirements of new situations as they arose.^ 
Such declarations in so far as they conformed to a 
general conception of what was fair and proper 
(Dharma), that is in so far as they commanded 
support from the public opinion of the class or 
group concerned, formed part of the social code, 
and were liable in the ultimate resort to be enforced 
by the king's government. Indian Society did not 
commit to the care of government anything more 
than the tasks of police and justice. Even the adjudi- 
cation of disputes among individuals and groups often 
took place without reference to the officers of the crown, 
and went up to them’ only in the last resort, when other 
means had failed. The essentials of social regulation 



'CHE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO^A EMPIRE 


237 


were undertaken by numberless local groups of a here- 
ditary or voluntary character, and the duty of the 
central government was only to maintain the general 
conditions of peace and security i^eded for these 
numerous social organisations to thrive and fulfil their 
several purposes. The law-codes ( Smrtis ) and the 
learned ( sistas ), as well as the elders in each group, 
commanded the allegiance of these social groups more 
readily than royal mandates that contravened Law 
(Dharma) and custom ( dcdra ). The king was in no 
sense a law-maker; he was only the guardian of social 
life and laws. 


The Cola 
bureaucracy. 


Un this respect the Cola government did not differ 
* perceptibly from its contemporaries. 
What distinguished it from them was 
the superior executive strength it was 
able to develop by bringing into existence a highly 
organised and thoroughly efficient bureaucracy. .It saw 
to it, moreover, that the growing host of officials by no 
means interfered with the free life and the initiative 
of local authorities and associations, while at the same 
time they controlled them efficiently and kept them 
on the straight path by a periodical scrutiny of their 
affairs. The more one reads the contemporary records, 
the more one begins to, admire the nice balance struck 
between centralised control and local initiative* the elear 
distinction, ever present, between the functions of the 
state and those of the social group. The individual, as 




such, did not count. The problem of ‘the man versus 
the state' never arose in a society that is best described 
as a federation of groupsfN 



288 


tatE CO^A.S 


i The hierarchy of officials in the service of the king 
were in tlie ehjOyui'ent of titles and distinctions which 
marked them off from one another and from the rest 

V ■ A ** ■*+**' *** * « 4. . -* * *■> * .. V I * t r pr' - * * + S’ 

of society. Some of these were titles of ancient renown 
like enadr, and mar ay an, found mentioned as early as 
the age of the Sangam. From the context in which the 


author of the T olkdppiyam w mentions mar ay am, it 
would seem originally to have been a military title indi- 
cating distinction won on the field of’ battle. In the 
inscriptions of this period, however, we find the title in 
more common use for designating persons in civil 
occupations like Kadigai-marayan, Yacciya-marayan 

and so on. We have also the title 


Official nobmty. mdrdsi, the feminine of mdrayan, 

applied to the wives of the mdrdyas. 01 
Araiyan and peraraiyan are other titles also of 


quite common occurrence and conferred on per- 
sons distinguished in civil occupations like — nittap- 


peraraiyan (grand master of the dance). We have 


also the general title adigdrigal used to describe 
the higher officers in the army and in general 
administration which were not differentiated from each 


other in those days as they are now. These adigdrigal 
often described themselves by the name of the ruling 
sovereign followed by the phrase mdvendave]dr and it 
is often impossible, as a result, to detect their personal 
names, and unless particular care is taken, one is apt 
easily to mistake one officer for another with similar or 


"Porul, Purattinai siitra 8 and IJampQrapar thereon who seems to 
Interpret the text better than Naccin&rkkiniyar. 

« J 7SA of 1895. M&rdyan and peraraiyan mean the same thing as 
mah&r&ja . Ka4igai is a division of time, and Ka4igai>m. time-keeper* 
while vdcciya is a derivative of v&dya, musical instrument. 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE CO^A EMPIRE 


239 


even identical titles. The annotator of the Takkaydgap- 
parcmi, writing no doubt some centuries after our 
period, gives a quaint account of the class of adigarigal, 
which may be rendered thus : ‘ ‘ The adigarigal are said 
to have come of the families descended from Bhojaraja. 
Members of these families only accepted appointments 
as mantris, and did no other work. It is an improper 
thing that they are found holding the position 
of accountants in these days ; except that they could not 
wear a crown, they are entitled to all the other insignia 
of royalty, and it is improper for them to accept any 
positions other than those of mantris.” 02 This curious 
legend shows how quickly the new class of official nobi- 
lity that was coming up as a result of the elaboration 
of the Cola administrative system developed group- 
traditions of its own and how readily such inventions 
gained currency. The wives of the adigdris may have 
been called adigdriccis; but we have obvious instances 
of the women in the female establishments of the queens 
bearing the title in their own right . 03 A more general 
distinction often found in the records of the period is 
that between the higher grade and lower grade of official 
nobility, so to say. The terms ‘perundaram’ and 
‘sirutaram’ (often with ‘tanam’ written for < taram > ) 
seem to imply this distinction more than anything else ; 04 
the officers and servants, karumigal and panimakkal, 
even, at tim'es, divisions of the army, are mentioned as 
belonging to the perundanam or the sirudanam .° 5 

•’Gloss on v. 179. The title 'PerunambP is also explained here, and 
connected with the 'Adig&ri’ title. 

•*463 of 1918; 213 of 1894; 9S of 1928. 

••ARB. 1913, II, 22. El. xvili, p. 336. 

•*29 of 1897; 811. li, 82-83. 



240 


THE CO(jAS 


Sometimes an intermediate status is also implied by 
the term sirudanattup-perundaram to which even com- 
manders of troops, sendpatis are assigned. 00 It is also 
to be noted that not only the king, but some of his more 
important feudatories like Paluvettaraiyar Kandan- 
j|naravan, 67 and perhaps also other members of the royal 
family, employed officials and servants grouped in such 
higher and lower grades. The earliest mention of the 
perundaram in a datable record is in the fifth year of 
Maduraikonda Rajakesari, 68 c. A.D. 961. Eight officers 
of Rajaraja, of the perundaram rank, along with some 
others, were caught by the king in some act of cowardice 
or misdemeanour, and endowed lamps in the Tanjore 
temple apparently in fulfilment of vow's they had 
taken to secure divine intercession against their being 
disgraced by the king. 69 Nyayattar (judges) of both 
perundanam and sirudanam are mentioned in the 
reign of Rajadhiraja II. 70 


Recruitment; 

tenure. 


Little is known of the manner in which the officials 

of different grade^. were -chosen for 
'appointment in the first instance and for 

* +T • K *■*•!** *- * . t _ Iw + * » * i ' „,*M ) 

*pT6motioh to higher ranks thereafter. 

•‘-I. ^ V ^ A 4 * * * *^ >*■«, ^ * ** mi* 

Birth and high connection must have conferred some 
advantage at the start, though the subsequent career 
might have depended largely upon the individual 
ability of a person, and the occasions for distinguished 


••SII. ii, 56; 84 of 1896. 
••106 of 1895. 

”246 of 1912. 

••SII. ii, p. 477 n. 

”224 Of 1923. 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE COLA EMPIRE 


241 


$ervice..wliicli he got and utilised successfully. As even 
the succession to the throne appears to have been deter- 
mined by a proper regard for the individual merits of 
those who might be deemed eligible for it, and as 
successive kings are seen to have used their discretion 
freely and fearlessly, not hesitating to keep out the 
unfit and always seeking to instal as heir-apparent the 

/, j., V , . . .V. ~ 

ablest person of their own generation gr the next, it is 
got a violent Assumption to make that the same stress 
on ability marked the choice and encouragement of 

m \ * * ^ 1 - *w"* 

public servants io,lheJdng ; ’s. service. The most common 
method of remunerating officials was that of assigning 
to each according to his status a certain extent of land 71 
which he held as his pvitd, and regular ca^h payments 
from the public treasury were practically unknown. 
Bui the income from " such rcssi'gHtfiehts usually con- 

* * * •■I*' f { ' * * * * y r “ ** *r 

listed, of two parts, one realised in kind and the other in 


«asb.payments. What was assigned in all these cases 
was by no means the absolute proprietorship of the soil 
which always belonged to the individual occupier or the 
village community, unless indeed their rights were 
bought out, but the rights of the central government to 
certain dues from the area so assigned . 72 Such assign- 
ments often included a whole village, or even district , 73 
and this is the reason why many officials are found 
described as possessors or leaders ( udaiydn , Mian ) 74 of 


tJ e.g. 419 of 1923. 

»»cf. Anbil plates 11. 173-4 : KOttoftn imarpti ladu epp&rppattadum 
ivanukk&y tirittdvcddguvuvi ; cf. Leyden 1. 286-8; Tiruvalangatju li. 442-3. 

T, e.g. 68 of 1923; 177 of 1911. In the reign of KulOttunga III, a certain 
Vadugan DSvan gave away a 2|3 share of his rights so assigned to him as 
stridhana (dowry) to his two daughters, (313 of 1929). 

f4 In one Instance there is mention of an ilr-kij.atti (297 of 1901). 

K—31 



242 


THE C&^AS 


particular villages or even nad/us. It was open to the 
assignees to sell or otherwise alienate or give away in 
part or as a whole the rights assigned to them. The 
system was open to uncertainties and abuses, though 
perhaps effectively checked by the accurate record of 
landrights maintained by the government and by the 
public opinion of the villages themselves, then more 
ready to assert itself in various ways than in our times. 



self-governing village was the unit of govern- 
ment.. A number of them constituted 


Administrative 

divisions. 


a kurram or nudu or kottam as it was 

«• M • • • 


called in different parts of the country. 
What is often described as a taniyur (a town apart) 
seems to have been a big sized village large enough to 
form a kurram by itself, as is implied by the phrase 
occasionally employed in connection with such places — 
viz. tan-kurru , 75 Several examples of such taniviirs, in 
some ways analogous to the boroughs of mediaeval 
England, can be gathered from the inscriptions . 76 A 
number of kurrams made up a valamdu, often also 
called nddu in the region where the smaller 
division was called kottam viz. Tondai-nadu alias 
Jayangondasola-mandalam. Above the valanadu 77 was 
the mandaJam or province proper, the largest division 
of administration. There were about eight or nine of 
these provinces including Ceylon, at the end of 
Rajaraja’s reign and it does not seem likely that this 


”«//. ill, p. 3, ». 7. 

"e.g. 129 of 1919; 259 of 1921; 167 of 1915; 90 of 1892 etc. 

7T The .Leyden grant (1. 77) equates Janapada with kU^am and 
Janapada-nivaha with va}and$u< 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE CO^A EMPIRE 


243 


number was ever exceeded. 78 The subordinate divisions 
evidently underwent numerous reshufflings, and their 
names were changed so often as to justify the complaint 
that ‘ ‘ Cola geography came to suffer as much from the 
plague of homonyms as the kings themselves. ’ ’ 7< y 

kThe designations and functions of some of the 
officers of government as they are found in the more 

important inscriptions of the period 
Adnunistvation. give us a very good idea of the numbers 

and organisation of the executive 
government of the dayJ^Tke general terms by which 
such officers of all ranks are described are Karmnigal 
and Pani-makkal , more or less corresponding to 
‘officials’ and ‘servants ’A The Anbil plates of Sundara 
Cola mention a Brahmin Saciva by name Animddha 
whose father was a teacher who gloried in .a life of 
learning and instruction, and whose grandfather was 
an Ahitdgni and a devotee of Rangesa. Aniruddha’s 
was a celebrated family of .Vaisnavas from the village 
of Anbil. What the exact position of this ‘noble 
minister’ ( many a saciva ■) of the Jaimini sutra and the 
Avenika gotra was in the administration, we are not 
told. But he got from the king the title of Brahmadhi- 
raja and a perpetual grant of 10 veils of land in token of 
his regard and affection. The machinery employed for 
the execution of this order of the king is comparatively 
simple. The order is communicated in the form of a 
4rl-mukham by the Anatti, the executive officer nomi- 
nated by the king for the purpose, and the rest is done 

X *SIL ii, Introdn. pp. 21-9. Gangap&gi came to be called Mugikop^a* 
66Jtamaii<Jalara (490 of 1911). 

xxvi (1897), 144. 



244 


TUE! CO^AS 


by the local corporations to whom the letter is 
addressed ; and when the transaction is complete and a 
record of it is drawn up, it is attested by a number of 
persons who appear to be local magnates and describe 
themselves in various ways as N attukkon, Nadu- 
kilavan, Urudaiyan and so on. It is difficult to decide 
if these witnesses were only prominent men of the 
neighbourhood or held definite posts under government. 
However that may be, the procedure followed some 
years later under similar circumstances is far more 
elaborate and furnishes a measure of the complexity of 
the administrative organisation that had grown in the 
interval. The larger Leyden grant and the Tiruvalan- 
gadu plates exhibit a close resemblance with regard to 
their official forms. The grant of Anaimangalam to the 
Bauddha shrine in the Cudamanivarma-vihara was 
ordered by the king on the 92nd day of the twenty-first 
year of his reign, recorded on the ninety-sixth day of 
the same year, and the execution was completed on the 
113th day of the twenty-third year. 80 The correspond- 
ing dates for the grant of Palaiyanur as a devadaina 
recorded in the Tiruvalangadu plates of Rajendra I are : 
the 88th and 90th days in the sixth regnal year, and 
155th in the seventh of that monarch. 81 

We have an instance reported in an inscription 82 
of Uttama Cola which furnishes an early example 
of remissness and neglect with regard to details, 


*•11. 115, 148-9, and 434. 

»*U. 6, 62, and 517, Tamil Text 
•>286 of 1906. ( 811 . ill, 142). 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO^A EMPIRE ^45 

partly due to the fact that the system of audit 
and control elaborated in later times had not 
yet arrived. The village Sirriyarrur was granted 
as a devadma and brahmadeya in the twenty- 
first year of Aditya I, apparently soon after his over- 
throw of Aparajita and the annexation of Tondai- 
mandalam. Although a sdsana was drawn up in the 
very next year, the grant was not entered in the account 
books till the fourth year of Parantaka -I, or more than 
twelve years later. Again, in the 36th year of 
Parantaka I a fresh allocation was made of the dues 

from the lands (granted to the temple) for which the 
assembly of Puduppakkam was responsible; the 
assembly apparently managed to evade the enhanced 
assessment due from it in consequence; towards the 
close of Uttama Cola’s reign the whole subject was 
brought up for enquiry before the king at Kancipuram, 
the defaulters punished, and the rights of the temple 
restored. The confusion in this instance may have also 
been partly due to the disturbed state of the times 
following the Bastrakuta invasion. 83 In this instance, 
the complaint against the sabha of Puduppakkam 1 , is 
laid before a high official at the Court, having the title 

Solamuvenda-Yelan, by the authorities of the temple; 
that official takes it to the king; 84 the king himself 
summons to his presence the parties concerned and 
delivers judgement after enquiry, confirming the 

”330 of 1917; (K&j&dhir&ja 30) is an example of unusual delay in the 
execution of an order. 332 of 1916 is evidence of the same procedure 
being followed by the Viceroys of the P&pdya country. 

” 11 . 34 - 6 * 



246 


THE COJiAS 


old grants to the temple and the responsibility of 
Puduppakkam for the supply of a certain quantity 
of paddy and a fixed amount of gold, and orders 
the necessary entries to he made in the rolls. 
The officers present on the occasion were one 
Tcarumi , two naduvirukkai, who acted as anatti 
and vdykkelvi ; the order was written out by an 
uttaramantri on duty (dlai-eludum) , and compared and 
attested by the olai-ndyagam; then a karwmi 85 ordered 
the entry to be made in the registers ( variyilittuk-kolga ) 
in accordance with this document ( tittu ) ; and 
then, four officers of the puravu-vari one of whom was 
an uttaramantri, one of the varippottagam, four muka - 
vetti officers, three officers of the puravu-vari of Tondai- 
nadu, two of the varippottagalc-kanakku, and two of the 
variyilidu were present together and made the entries in 
the official records and attested them.") In the Leyden 
grant are enumerated all these stages in almost identical 
form , 88 and there is one more step at the end; an 
officer called mandira-olai sends a timmugam to the 
ndttdr of the Pattinak-kurram requesting them to make 
an aravolai (charity-deed) after marking off in a 
solemn manner the boundaries of the village granted, 
which they do in the presence of a puravu-vari officer. 
It may be observed, in passing, that this particular 
grant seems to be signed by the representative officers of 
all the villages of the Pattinakkuryam. The Tiru- 
valangadu plates mention also these later stages 
culminating in the drawing up of an axaAJdlai, and 

M At this stage the Tiruvalanga<fu plates have five adigdritfa} 
(11* 485-94) and the Leyden grant apparently nine officers. (11. 138-43)* 

•• 11 * 129 - 150 . 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE COLA EMPIRE 


247 


further introduce the names of some new offices like 
puravuvari - tinaik - kalam , 87 pattdlai, kU-mugavetti, 
puravuvaritinaik-kalattukdcankdni in addition to those 
already named. 

The same officers are mentioned in similar connec- 
tions in many other records. The Timmukkuda] ins- 
cription of Virarajendra, 8S for instance, records the 
following stages: the monarch’s oral order is written 
out ( eluttu ) by a tirmnmidira-olai, and compared 
( oppu ) by the three officers called tirusma/ndira-olai- 
ndyagam, before it is entered ( pugunda ) ; three other 
officers, one of them a vidaiyil adigari, order the entry 
of this in the vari, and then, six officers of the udan- 
kuttam, twenty-eight of the vidaiyil , and four of the 
naduvi mk ka m cause this to be done ; nine superinten- 
dents ( kan-kdni ) of the puravu-vari tmaik-kalam , one 
varipottagam, eleven mugavettis, three variyilldtis, two 
varippottagah-hanaklms, and one pattdlai attest the 
entry in the vari in token of their presence when the 
order was read out and entered in the proper register. 
We are not, of course, to imagine that every order 
required the presence of such a host of officials to be put 
through ; the occasion recorded in this inscription was 
no doubt an exceptional one and there were a very large 
number of details to be settled and properly recorded. 
In fact this inscription is among the longest stone 
inscriptions in the world. But most of these offices, 
under the same or similar names, survived to the end of 
the reigns of Rajaraja III and Rajendra III. 

•'ll. 49-52; 67-61; and 494. 

”J82 of 1915, 



248 


THE Cd^AS 


With little assistance from contemporary literature 
in the elucidation of the public administration of the 
period, we are thrown almost entirely on the inscrip- 
tions themselves and the contexts in which the various 
terms cited above occur, in our attempt to interpret 
them. The term naduvimkkai literally means ‘being in 
the middle’ and as it is applied to the vijnapti ( vayk - 
kelvi ) the petitioner, and the dnatti the executive 
officer, it seems to carry with it the notion of liaison 
between the monarch and the persons who desired to 
lay matters before him for his consideration. There is 
no evidence to show that particular officers were 
specially told off for this purpose, with no other duties 
attaching to their offices ; on the other hand, it seems 
more likely that highly placed officials, for one reason 
or another, espoused the cause of particular persons or 
groups that came seeking royal intercession, and con- 
sented to act as naduvirukkai in those specific cases. 
Likewise the execution of particular orders of the king 
was entrusted specially to particular officers selected 
for the purpose. The offices of the olai 89 seem to have 
been of a specialised character, and the organisation 
was carefully designed to minimise the possibilities of 
error in recording the orders. Thus the first draft 
of the order written by the olai officer 90 in immediate 
attendance on the king is scrutinised and approved by 
those of the olai - ndyagam > 01 that is by senior officers 
conversant with the proper official form and practice, 

••Literally 'palm-leaf' on which records were written. 

••Often called tirwmandirarOlai , clerk of the holy word. 

*>Also called tiru-mandira-OTai-n&yagam ; nayagam means chief or 
superintendent. 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE COLA EMPIRE 


249 


the custodians of official tradition, corresponding to 
the permanent officials of a modern secretariat, who 
scrutinise each new proposal in the light of existing 
codes, rules and practice ; then the olai becomes a tlttu 
and affords the basis for further action, such as an entry 
in the permanent record books, or a communication 
to the local authorities concerned, or both. Such com- 
munications to local bodies were called tirumugam or 
srimukham, 92 and received by the addressees often with 
great ceremony ; at any rate the official formula record- 
in g their receipt is highly formal and deferential. The 
Anbil plates for instance contain these picturesque 
phrases describing the occasion : 93 “Seeing the sri- 
mukham, we rose to welcome it, saluted it and placed it 
on our heads before taking and reading it.” Among 
the permanent records, the vari p-pottagam and the 
varip-pottagak-kanakku are to be carefully distin- 
guished, and they formed the most important registers 
of the Revenue administration as their names indicate. 
This is, however, not to endorse what has so often been 
asserted of all oriental governments, that they are 
primarily tax-collecting agencies. All governments 
worth the name have to collect taxes in order 
to maintain themselves and the public activities 
in their charge ; and there is much evidence that 
the Cola government was very mindful of its 
revenue. But the varip-pottagam was not a manual 
of extortion, but a carefully maintained record 
of land-rights, based on complete enquiries and 
accurate surveys, and kept up-to-date by fresh entries 

••Also at times called niyOgam (83 of 1897) . 

”11. 132-3. cf. Leyden— 11. 174-6. TlruvSlangSdu, II. 143-4. etc. 

K— 32 



250 


THE CO^AS 


made from time to time by a set of well trained 
officials who were no strangers to the feelings of service 
tradition and loyalty to the king and state that actuate 
modem administrators. The varippottagak-kanakku 
was apparently a register corresponding to what we 
now call Demand-Collection-Balance statements, show- 
ing clearly the position relating to current receipts at 
any time. 

The exact functions of the different grades of the 
officials named are not easy to define. The term 
‘ piiravu-vari-tinaik-kalani’ occurs in so many combi- 
nations that it is very essential to get as clear a notion 
of its content as possible. The term ‘ puravu ’ has the 
meaning of ‘cultivated land ’. 94 ‘Puravu- vari’, there- 
fore, may be equated with ‘land-tax’. The term 
< puravu > by itself is found used in the same sense in 

several inscriptions and includes obviously all payments 

v * 

due from lands in kind and in money . 95 In fact in these 

\t * ' , 

contexts the term closely resembles the modem revenue 
term ‘assessment’ as employed by the Indian land 
revenue officers. It may be suggested that in the 
expression varippottagam we must recognise a contrac- 
tion of purava-varippottagam, the second member of 
the compound word for land-revenue, puravu-vari, 
doing duty for the whole. If these interpretations are 
sound, the expression e puravu-vari-tinaik-kalam* would 
necessarily mean the Department of land-revenue, and 
all the combinations in which this phrase is introduced 

• •Putam, 260, 1. 9 and Index, b. v. Puravu. 

••811. ill. 142, 11. 29, 60, 67 and EL xvii, pp. 6-6. Also 811. 11, p. 386, 
text I. 99; EI. Iv, p. 224, text 1. 19; ARE. 1920, II 4. 



THE GOVERNMENT OK THE CO^A. EMPIRE 


251 


must be interpreted accordingly . 96 We see clearly that 
a distinction was maintained between the officers con- 
cerned with the maintenance of the records and those 
engaged in the local areas in the actual task of collecting 
revenue and carrying on the administration. The 
central office of control over the whole kingdom! was 
also, carefully distinguished from the local offices which 
were accountable to it, as for instance the officers in the 
J ay angondasolamandalam mentioned in the Tiru- 
valangadu plates . 07 There are also mentioned in 
different connections a fair number of kankanis or 
supervisors who were the agents of the central depart- 
ment of control and audit, maintained as a cheek on 
the officers of the various departments in each locality. 
An entry in the varip-pottagam was known as a 
variyilidu, and it is possible that only officers bearing 
the designation varippottagam and variyilidu could 
make fresh entries in the books; and to judge from the 
instances furnished by the copper-plate grants, this was 
a most elaborate process requiring a considerable 
measure of publicity at almost every stage of it. The 

" G The learned editors of the 811. have been very cautious in dealing 
with the numerous and obscure terms they have had to elucidate. The 
expression “ Furavu-vari-tiiiaik-kalattu varippottuga-nayagcnn,'' occurs in 
81 1. ii, 88 and is rendered by Venkayya into: “the master of the rent-roll 
in the department (tiyaikkalam) of taxes (levied from) endowments.” 
He explains himself in a note by referring us to an inscription of Adki- 
rajendra (812. iii, p. 116), in which the proceeds of dtivadana villages made 
over to a temple are appropriated for the expenses of the temple by the 
officers of the puravvtrvarHi^aik-ka\am. It seems to me, however, that like 
their modern counterparts, the officers of the land-revenue department were 
entrusted with many other functions which, though not connected directly 
with the collection of revenue, they were in a position to discharge in the 
best manner and with the greatest economy of effort. 1 would translate 
the phrase in BII . ii, 88 into: “the master of the rent-roll in the department 
of land-revenue.” 

•m. 120 ff. 



252 


ME COliAS 


mugavetti of apparently two ranks , 08 and the pattolai 
were also minor officers of the Land-Revenue Depart- 
ment , 00 of whose duties we have no precise knowledge. 
The suggestion that mugavetti is a contraction of 
sri-muga-vetti, and that it connotes the duty of writing 
or engraving, as the case may be, of royal letters, may 
well be true . 100 

J The duties of Revenue officers included, then as 
now, many other. spheres besides that indicated by their 
designations. They are often found regulating the 

f > * i, *. 

receipts and expenditure of temples, or helping local 
authorities to do so . 101 They audit the accounts of 
temples and take steps for the prevention of embezzle- 
ment . 102 In one instance they are seen, as a depart- 
ment of the government, purchasing land after paying 
cash to a village assembly ; the purpose of the purchase 
is not clear as the inscription is incomplete . 103 They 
attest public documents of importance drawn up by 
local authorities like village sabhas, embodying their 
resolutions such as exempting lands from payments of 
taxes and dues , 104 determining the status and obligations 
of particular groups of people 105 and so on. They seem 
to have been in the enjoyment of magisterial powers. 
In one instance they bound over to good behaviour the 
villagers of Kallur who renounced some temple lands 

»*cf. Kilmugavett-i in Tiruvalang&(Ju plates, 1. 60. 

•‘81 1, iii, p. 139. 

'**811. iii, p. 301, ». 1. 
iii, 67. 

“ s 183 of 1915. 

>•*135 Of 1926. 

,0, 2 of 1927. 
of 1910. 



frHE GOVERNMENT OP THE COfcA EMPIRE 253 

they had originally undertaken to cultivate, and were 
thereafter required not only to give up the lands but to 
undertake, on pain of being held guilty of treason, not 
to obstruct the cultivation of the lands renounced by 
them, nor to seek to re-establish their claim to them . 100 
The inscriptions abound in extravagant oaths and asse- 
verations ; yet, it seems proper to infer, in this particular 
instance, the existence of a somewhat acrimonious 
dispute between the authorities of the temple of a neigh- 
bouring village and the residents of Kallur. The temple 
owned some lands in Kallur of which the cultivation 
was in the first instance entrusted to the people of that 
village ; the Kallur villagers suddenly threw up the land 
and pleaded inability to continue the cultivation and the 
periodical payment to the temple of the dues thereon. 
The bond entered into by them with the revenue officers 
closed the dispute, so far as we know. A nattarasa in 
the Mysore country conducts a trial for manslaughter . 107 
It may be observed in passing that a revenue official, 
an accountant, is stated 108 to have received a deposit of 
money that belonged to a charitable endowment in the 
charge of the assembly of Manali and agreed to pay the 
annual interest on it at a prescribed rate. This he must 
have done in his private capacity; but, if that be so, the 
example is interesting in relation to the personal con- 
duct of public servants. 

(In the inscriptions we come across the names of 
several other offices representing the central govern- 
ment in the districts. Of their functions we can as yet 

10 *630 of 1916. 

,4, 497 of 1911. 

>”142 of 1912. 



254 


taE CO^AS 


} 


form no accurate idea. ) We can only note their names 
such as : sanda - vigfaham , 10a mahmnatra — ancient 
name, 110 nadu ( kottarn ) vayai 111 and ndtluk-kandu katci 
(sungamum karaiyum seygira). The creation of a 
caturvedinmngalam, a tax-free brahtnadeya granted by 
the king to 108 Brahmins, in the twelfth year of 
Kulottunga I, was first entered in the tax-register 
( vari ) and then communicated to the mandalar 
mudaliydr of Mudigonda-sola-mandalam where the land 
so given away wias situated. 112 A nudii-k dr a, Aditta- 
sulamani Brahma-marayar, is mentioned in an inscrip- 
tion of about 1114 A.D. from Ennayiram; 113 possibly, 
his duties were connected with the revenue survey and 
settlement of the nadu. 

We have stated above that no clear evidence is 


UtJan-kuUam. 


forthcoming of the existence of a 


council of ministers or other officials 


regularly associated with the king in the central 
government of the realm. But the value of consultation 
and deliberation was emphasised in all ancient treatises 
on polity, and not even the most autocratic of 
monarebs felt himself free to throw away the 
wise counsels of able ministers. Borne high officials 
of the state are described as of the uda>i-kuf,}a>n, 
an expression meaning ‘the group or assemblage 
(ever) at hand;’ the term ‘ kuttam ’ is often applied to 
the executive bodies of rural assemblies in the phrase 


1M 2 of 1927. 

11 “539 of 1920; and 502 of 1911. .cf. Woolner, Asoka Text and 
Glossary, p. 122, Div&karam II. 04; Periya Pur&nam Sifuttopga, vv. 2 
and 3. 

***274 of 1910. 


111 MAR, 1917, pp. 42-4. 
**•351 of 1917. 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE CO^A EMPIRE 


255 


kuttapperumakkal. The idea of the udan-kuttam 
then seems to be that of a body of executive officers in 
immediate attendance on the king. \ Some officers of 
this rank are named in a record 114 (from Tiruppaceur) 
of the third year of Adhirajendra; a few years earlier, 
six officers of the udan-kuttam are mentioned in the 

• • f 

Tirumukkiidal inscription of the fifth year of Ylra- 
rajendradeva 115 (A.D. 1067). An inscription 116 of the 
thirtieth regnal year of Kulottunga I mentions the 
land revenue department of the udan-kuttam and thus 
raises the presumption that each department of the 
bureaucracy was represented in this group of officers in 
immediate attendance on the king. If this presumption 
is correct, (the role of the udan-k uttam must be held to be 
not so much that of a council, as of a staff of personal 
assistants who served as liaison officers between the 
monarch and the regular bureaucracy, explained the 
policy laid down by the king to the members of the 
departments carrying on their work in the mofussil, and 
conveyed to the king, as occasion required, the actual 
results, in the provinces, of the policies and measures of 
government. At the same time, it would have been open 
to the king to consult any official or group of officials on 
matters on which he felt the need of their advice. The 
important part played in the administration of the 
realm by this group, the nearest approach to a council 
of ministers that we have been able to trace, was well 
recognised by Pallavarayar, the trusted minister, who 

‘“113 of 1930. 

‘“182 of 1916. This list Is followed by the names of twenty-eight 
viQaiyil-atig&rigal. 

“•429 of 191«. 



356 


THE CO^AS 


armed himself with the consent of the udan-huttam 

• • * 

before he proceeded to instal Rajadhiraja II on the 
Cola throne . 117 : 

. 4 , 4 

f 

'As the head of the civil administration, the king 
himself occasionally toured the country and wherever 
necessary carried on inquests into the local administra- 
tion. The royal camp was usually fixed in temples 
and mandapas in places where there were no palaces. 
The king is also found attending the periodical festivals 
in some of the bigger shrines such as Tiruvorriyur, 
Cidambaram, Timvanir and Kanclpuram. We shall see 
that besides the taxes collected by the central govern- 
ment, several local bodies and corporations enjoyed the 
privilege of raising tolls and octroi duties and other 
miscellaneous dues. It would seem that the exercise 
of these privileges was subject to general supervision 
and control from the centre. There is an example of 
such regulation in a royal order of the time of 
Rajendra II by which the right to raise such dues in 
the village of Yakkur (Bahur) is made the monopoly 
of the Vellalas who are said to have had the kdni of 
the place . 118 ’ ; 

4 

frustice A like legislation, was very largely a matter 

justice °f local concern, and minor disputes 

were settled by one or other of the 
corporations to which the disputants belonged. The 
village .assemblies exercised large powers in such 
matters and. settled, sometimes by means of small 

alT 433 of 1924, cf. ante, p. 92. 

J,, 180 of 1919. The expression used is ‘V&kHr-p&ttam*. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO^A EMPIRE 


257 


committees of nyay attar, affairs that did not fall within 
the jurisdiction of the occupational or voluntary groups 
in the locality. The dharmasana is mentioned in several 
inscriptions 119 as the place to which persons in charge 
of charitable endowments undertake to remit the fines 
due from them in cases of default.' Though this is 
not quite certain, it seems most likely that the 
dharmasana was the king's court of justice and that 


in deciding matters brought before it, "the court was 
assisted by the presence of learned Brahmans versed 


in the law, the dharmasana-bhattas as they are called 
in the inscriptions. On the nature of judicial records, 
if any, or the details of judicial procedure, we learn 
nothing from the inscriptions; and in our extremity, 
we have to turn to the story of a mythical trial preserved 
in a literary work, written most probably in the reign 
of Kulottunga II. 


Sekkilar narrates at length how the Lord Siva, out 
of his grace, saved Sundaramurtti from falling into 
the miseries of family life by appearing before him as 
a Brahman on the eve of his marriage and claiming him 
as his bondslave. In his ignorance, Sundaramurtti at 
first contests the claim; but the intrepid old Brahman 
insists on his claim being settled before Sundaramurtti 
marries, and the dispute is taken before the law-court 
of Tiruvennai-nallur . 120 In the sabha of learned 
Brahmans, the plaintiff’s case ( muraippadu ) is first 
stated; an objection is raised by the judges that the 
plaint is in violation of usage which forbids a Brahman 


119 811. Ilf, index, s. v. Dharmasana . 

1 * 0 Tadut tatkon^puramm — rv . 51-63. 

K— 33 


See also JOR . vi, pp. 83 ff, 



258 


THE CO^iAS 


being enslaved under any conditions; the plaintiff 
answers that a deed of perpetual bondage on behalf of 
himself and his descendants had been executed by the 
grandfather of the defendant, and asks indignantly 
whether it is a proper method of winning a case to tear 
up the evidence produced by the opposite side — a thing 
that Sundaramurtti had done earlier in the proceedings 
before the parties reached the court-house ; at this stage 
the judges express their approval of the old Brahman’s 
arguments and require the defendant to state his plea ; 
deeply agitated, Sundaramurtti confesses to a feeling 
of utter amazement, appeals to the personal knowledge 
of the judges that he was an ddisaiva of the village, and 
states that he feels too bewildered to find an answer to 
the preposterous claim of the plaintiff; the judges then 
turn to the plaintiff and require him to prove the un- 
usual claim put forward by him by one of three methods, 
usage ( dtci ), documents ( avanam ), or the testimony of 
eyewitnesses (ayaldr-tan gal-ldtei) ; the plaintiff now 
avers that the document destroyed by the defendant 
was only a copy, and that the original deed was still with 
him and that he would produce it, if its safety av.is 
guaranteed by the court; the original deed is then 
produced, the karanattdn takes charge of the document 
which is in the form of a roll, unrolls it and reads it 
out ; the apparent age of the document, its contents, the 
signatures of witnesses which are scrutinised and found 
to be regular, and a comparison with another document 
from the record office 121 known to have been written in 

m The text is very explicit about the record room: Maruptfadu-teJJya 
majxa majraiyavaneJtutt&l dlai-yara^aru-Mppil v gyon jaiaittu<Jan-oppu 
nokki. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CO^A EMPIRE 


259 


the hand of Sundaramurtti’s grandfather establish 
the genuineness of the deed by which he is seen 
to have pledged himself and his descendants to 
eternal slavery to the Pittan (Siva) of Tiruvennai- 
nallur, and this concludes the investigation. The judges 
at once pronounce judgement that Nambi Aruran had 
lost his case to the Brahman sage, and that he was in fact 
the slave of the plaintiff. What followed need not be 
pursued here. 

Judicial procedure could not have changed very 
much between the time say of Rajaraja I and that of 
ICulottunga II when Sekkilar composed his great 
Purfina. In this purana indeed Sekkilar aimed at 
producing literature which should please and entertain 
the contemporary Cola monarch better than the vulgar 
works of heretical Jains. Though he was handling 
ancient themes, therefore, it is proper to assume that 
in enlarging upon the holy lives of the Saiva saints, 
from the meagre outlines preserved by his predecessors, 

Sekkilar drew upon his intimate knowledge of contem- 
porary life to lend colour and verisimilitude to his 
narration. The trial scene summarised above may, 
therefore, be treated as a fair specimen of the daily 
occurrences in the numberless villages of the Cola 
kingdom. It is remarkable how little the presence of 
the super natural is allowed to intrude into the account 
of the trial, and how much of the trial is borne out by 
inscriptions known to us. The village assembly acting 
as a judicial body, the dominance of senior and learned 
Brahmans in the proceedings on such occasions, and 



260 


THE COJjAS 


the role of the karanattan are quite in keeping with 
what we leam on these subjects from other sources. 
The procedure adopted is on the whole simple and 
apparently not governed by any fixed rules. The 
disputants state their own cases, — there is no trace of 
any employment of advocates, — and the emotion or 
certitude with which they present their pleas has its 
effect on the mind of the judges. There is no 
hard and fast rule that every statement of a relevant 
fact in the case must be established in the 
course of the proceedings and the judges are 
expected to use their personal knowledge of facts rele- 
vant to the case before them. The three lines of 
evidence by which facts which are challenged may be 
established, the tests employed to ascertain the trust- 
worthiness of a document, the only evidence produced 
in this trial, clearly represent contemporary practice. 
The hint that we get, incidentally, that the village had 
access to a well-guarded record-room where documents 
ranging over a period of several years were carefully 
preserved may appear incredible but for the emphasis 
laid on records of another type in the inscriptions 
to which attention has been drawn before. The result 
of the trial seems to be that an express document can 
override custom however well established, and no 
reasons of public policy could stop the enforcement of a 
specific agreement however opposed to public opinion 
and accepted morality. But we must not press this 
inference as, in the story, the conclusion of the trial is 
just rendered tolerable by the immediate revelation of 
the Divine element in it j for the judges, strangely as it 



THE GOVERNMENT OP THE CO^A EMPIRE 261 

seems to us, after delivering judgement, want the 
plaintiff who has won the suit as a resident of the vil- 
lage, — he is described as Pittan (Siva) of Tiruve^nai- 
nallur, — to show them his house and estate, and then 
the god leads them towards the temple, suddenly 
disappears, and soon after informs Sundaramurtti of 
the reason for his miraculous intervention to stop his 
marriage. We may assume that in a real trial this 
question of the residence of the plaintiff would, if 
necessary, have been raised much earlier, and that an 
agreement in such flagrant violation of prevalent 
morality would not have been so readily enforced. 

i^rhe distinction between civil and criminal offences 

was unknown; there are few instances where we can 

«»* 1 1 

trace the conception of crime as a public wrong ; one of 
them 1 -* is the case of two persons who stole the images, 
ornaments, etc. belonging to a temple and were 
punished by the confiscation of all their properties, 
which were sold publicly, the p rocee ds being remitted 
to the king’s treasury. ; This was about A.D. 1222. 
• Speaking generally all offences including those com- 
mitted by village officials, were tried in the first instance 
in village courts ; in cases of dissatisfaction the matter 

***+>* .«*, t ' r » « « * \ ^ r 

was taken up to the officer of the king ’s government in 
charge of the administration of the na4u. Seldom, 

^ jv , i * 4 

if at all, did an appeal go further than that. There was 
a great deal of rough natural justice dispensed through 
extra-judicial channels. The sharp definiteness and 
uniformity that characterise modem methods of justice 


1JS 308 Of 1927. 



262 


THE CO^AS 


were unknown, and in every ease, whatever the 
authority enquiring into a dispute, an effort was made 
to convince both parties that the standard of ideal 
justice which would satisfy reasonable men had been 
attained in the award. The prevalent notions about 
this standard were no doubt largely influenced by the 
smrtis, and by local practice. 

Sometimes disputes especially over civil rights 
were allowed to drag on without a settlement until time 
offered a solution. The sabhd of Srikantha-caturvedi- 
mangalam and the ur of Tiruverumbiyur had a 
boundary dispute of rather long standing; and the 
solution was found ultimately by a local chieftain buy- 
ing up the rights of both the parties in the disputed area 
paying prices that satisfied them both, and then handing 
over the land to the local temple as an endowment for 
the maintenance of persons singing sacred hymns to the 
accompaniment of specified musical instruments . 1 ' 3 


(That theft, adultery and forgery were considered 
serious offences is seen from the list of persons declared 
unfit, , for service on the village committees of 
Uttaramerur . 124 In this list of exclusions are 

V e' j * , 

mentiohed al^o persons who had ridden upon donkeys, 
4pdj?ossibly this was the form of punishment for some 
offence^. Considering that most offences appear to 
have been punished only by fines, and that even man- 
slaughter and murder 125 were often punished only by 


’**129 of 1914. 

”«1 of 1898. 

*** Accidents In hunting parties are too numerous to mention. Hunt* 
ing on horse-back is mentioned in 273 of 1919, (KulOttunga I, 43rd yr.h 
Death caused in a duel, and as the result of an attempt to outrage a 
concubine, is similarly punished— 109 of 1895; 77 of 1906. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COfcA EMP.IRE 


263 


the offender being required to maintain, a perpetual 
lamp burning in the nearest temple, the code must be 
Held to have erred on . the side of leniency.’’) In one 
instance, when a nadalvdn stabbed to death a comman- 
der of a regiment of bowmen, the king, Rajendra II, sent 
an order to the local village assembly that the culprit 
was to be required to endow 96 sheep for a lamp in the 
neighbouring temple. 126 In another, a woman com- 
mitted suicide, being unable to stand the pain or the 
shame of an ordeal to which she was subjected by a 
village official for the recovery of dues which she said 
she was not liable for ; the man is let off with a fine of 
32 kasus imposed by a meeting of the people from “the 
four quarters, eighteen districts and various coun- 
tries.” 127 In yet another, when one soldier killed 
another, he came to an agreement with the relatives of 
the deceased and endowed a lamp in the temple at 
Karuttattangudi, near Tanjore, 128 — an instance of pri- 
vate commutation for murder. In a solitary example 
from the Mysore country, assault and murder leads to 
the award of capital punishment by the nattaraja of 
Hulimadda. 129 In a case of homicide due to an accident 
in the reign of Kulottunga II, the judge expressly stated 
that the guilty man need not die for his offence 180 — a 
recognition of the fact that homicide may be punished 
with death. In another similar instance, some years 
later in the same reign, a vellala was the offender ; the 


*•227 of 1904. 
*’80 of 1906. 
••48 Of 1897. 
*•497 of 1911. 
*•64 Of 1900. 



264 


THE CO^AS 


case came up before an officer of the king’s government , 

he consulted the bhattas, and they advised him that 

death sentence should not be meted out to a vellala. 131 

• • • 

There is recorded an interesting case of vicarious 

punishment, about 1091 132 in the reign of Kulottunga I. 

A boy of six, while cutting wood with his sickle ( arival ), 

hurt another lad of seven, who died in consequence of 

the injury; the father was required to endow half-a- 

lamp in expiation of the boy’s offence. Another case of 

what appears like a penance, rather than punishment 

following an enquiry, comes from the reign of 

Kulottunga III; two men found a buffalo grazing 

amidst their crops in the fields; they belaboured the 

animal so severely that it died in consequence; they 

consulted the bhattas and were advised to endow a half- 

* * 

lamp in the neighbouring temple, and did so. 133 Another 
record of the same reign, from Kilaiyur (Tanjore), 
gives an instance of two persons who were a public 
nuisance and a source of trouble to Brahmins, vellala# 
and the temple; they were tried for rioting ( lalaham ) 
and incendiarism and together fined 1000 kusus; no one 
helped them to pay the fine, and their lands were sold to 
the temple for 1060 kasus, the extra amount of 60 kas us 
being treated as penalty for default in the payment of 
the fine. The inscription mentions incidentally a royal 
order of a general nature that in similar cases of rioting, 
incendiarism and so on, the amount of the fine may 
go up to 20,000 kasus. 133 In the sixteenth year of 
Kulottunga III, A.D. 1194, a case of misappropriation 

”>200 of 1929. 

“’228 of 1902. 

>‘*110 of 1919. 80 of 1925. 



THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CS^A EMPIRE 


265 


of temple property, sivadroha, is punished by the con- 
fiscation of the estate of the offender, the proceeds 
being handed over to the temple that had suffered by 
the offence . 134 


it>ff ences against the person of the king or his close 
relations were a class apart, and dealt with by the king 


himself. ) Attention has been drawn to the order of 
Raj a raj a I requiring the confiscation of the properties 
of persons involved in the murder of his elder brother 
Aditya II . 136 A similar procedure is adopted against 
another person for default in payment of fines imposed 
on him, — the original offence is not recorded, — and his 
properties were sold in djndkrayam , “Sale by (royal) 
order .” 186 Another example of unspecified offences 
against the king being severely dealt with by heavy 
fines collected by harsh processes is the ease of the 
Koliyak-kudaiyar ( ?) of Kuhur . 137 These three 
instances are all from the reign of Rajaraja I. Instances 
of rdjadroham became rather numerous towards the 
end, in the reign of Rajaraja III . 138 




i Cattle-lifting was a common offence in several 
parts of the kingdom and was not easy to control. The 
gift of Mangalam (Salem Dt.) as a devaddna was 
accompanied by a proclamation that the property of 
those who stole the cattle from this devaddna or 
otherwise caused any injury to the village would be 


>**189 of 1929; ARE. 1929, II 37. 
>’•577 of 1920, ante ch. viii. 
>••379 of 1922. 

>•>277 Of 1917. 
lt *Ante p. 187. 

K — U 



266 


THE COIAS 


forfeited to the temple, — a somewhat drastic declara- 
tion equalled only by the wide terms of some clauses in 
the emergency laws of modern states.) Acts of mischief 
against cattle, one of the chief forms of wealth in 
those days, from robbers and by means of regular 
cattle-raids in the open are recorded in numerous 
inscriptions from the Pudukkottali, North Areot and 
Mysore areas. 13 " Another source of danger to cattle 
was from wild animals, and a vigorous relief sculpture 
on a rock at KTl-muttugur (N. Arcot) commemorates 
the heroism of a man who felled a tiger on the spot . 140 
Such stray instances are bound always to occur; and 
their fewness on the whole strengthens the impression 
that during this period internal peace was very success- 
fully maintained. But the times were rough, and 
people had none of the sentimental squeamislmcss 
about physical pain and suffering that marks our out- 
look on life to-day. 

.Chau Jii-kua, the Chinese writer of the earlv 

' t/ 

thirteenth century, who has so often been cited above, 
has this to say on the Coja system of justice; : m “ When 
any one among the people is guilty of an offence, one of 
the Court Ministers punishes him; if the offence is 
light, the culprit is tied to a wooden frame and given 
fifty, seventy, or up to an hundred blows with a stick. 
Heinous crimes are punished with decapitation or by 
being trampled to death by an elephant.” \ 

t' 

>”316 of 1904; 104 of 1900; 168, 169, 186 of 1921 and others. 

•‘•2 of 1896; El. Iv, p. 179. 

*“p. 96. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

In the life of our day, the town has begun to 

replace the village as the characteristic 
village. unit. In a physical sense Indian lire is 

still largely led in the villages ; but ideas 
generated in the town, and propagated through the 
town-made newspaper and an urban system of 
education, are rafuefry changing the rural outlook, and 
few who have come into contact with these new forces 
are able to fit themselves into village life as it is or to 
resist the temptation to migrate to the nearest town. 

Until very recently, how T ever, village life engrossed 
the attention of the richest as well as the most cultured 
Indians in their daily concerns. The bulk of such 
persons had their residence in the villages, and 
exercised a dominant influence in the conduct of their 
affairs. The encomiums bestowed on the ancient 
village-republics of India by the observant British 
Indian administrators of the early nineteenth century, 
though we may not accept them as literally true, are 
clear proof that, until then, the village continued to 
be the real centre of social life and the principal 
nursery of social virtues. And from the hundreds of 
Cola inscriptions that have come down to us, we see 

that under the Colas the villages of Southern India 
were full of vigour and strength. 

(The beginnings of the system of village govern- 
ment that we see in full swing under the Colas must be 



268 


THE CO^AS 


sought in an earlier age. The Pandya and Pallava 
inscriptions of the eighth and early ninth centuries 
show a system, very similar, but not quite so developed, 

in operation throughout the Tamil country. For our 
puiposes, it is enough to observe that an important 
inscription from Manur 1 in the Timievelly district of 
about A.D. 800 anticipates in several respects the 
better known inscriptions of the time of Parantaka I 
from Uttar amerur in the Chingleput district. The 
life and functioning of rural institutions, the ultimate 
cells that sustained national existence, were clearly 
little affected by dynastic wars and the shiftings of 
political power at the top.' 

Government by means of primary assemblies 

comprising the adult males of each 

Assemblies. village was the central feature of rural 

organisation. Besides these assemblies, 
there were in existence many other groups and corpo- 
rations of a social, religious or economic character, each 
interested in looking after some definite local institution 
or function. The relation between these groups which 
are found in almost every village and the village 
assembly itself is not easily expressed in terms of 
modem political thought. The village assemblies and 
the groups alike derived their authority from ancient 
custom and ideal right (Dharma) V the moral support of 
public approval of their conduct in particular instances 
was in either case the primary sanction underlying 
their daily activity ; in the last resort they could both 


*EI. xzil, pp. 6-11. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


269 


appeal to the king’s government for support in so far 
as their behaviour conformed to the accepted code of 
moral conduct. What was right in each case depended 
on the circumstances, and on the application to them of 
enlightened reason informed by the principles of the 
law-codes (Smrti) and precedents, if any. Precisely 
in the determination of such casuistical points did the 
learned Bhattas of the time render the highest service 
to society. For to the extent to which their findings 
were impartial and convincing, and not warped by 
prejudice or corruption, to that extent was social 
harmony promoted and the foundations of orderly and 
peaceful development strengthened. That the system 
survived intact till the beginning of the last century 
must lead us to infer that this delicate and onerous 
work was on the whole well done by those to whom it 
was entrusted. The village assemblies and the groups 
were then more or less legally on the same footing 
in their relations to government and society. But 
they, in fact or even in theory, were not of 
equal importance to the life of the nation. The village 
assembly had the widest range of functions in relation 
to its locality, whereas the groups were each limited in 
the range of their operation to some specific purpose or 
other, such as the maintenance of a single temple, or 
the regulation of a single trade. The village assembly 
had a general interest in everything that these groups 
did, and in many things besides that none of them 
attempted. Even in matters that fell specifically 
within the competence of a particular group, the 
assembly had a concurrent jurisdiction to which any 



270 


THE CO^AS 


one could appeal, if the group concerned was in 
default. The groups, as long as they did their work 
well, relieved the assembly of that work ; the ultimate 
responsibility for local welfare, however, lay on the 
assembly. The members of the groups were also mem- 
bers of the assembly, and this fact must have consider- 
ably influenced their relations inter se. While the 
groups represented particular interests that might 
occasionally clash, the assembly looked after the general 
interest and, as a dispenser of justice, helped in adjust- 
ing rival claims to the satisfaction of all parties. Per- 
haps the nearest analogy to this complex of relations 
may be found in the pluralist view of the relation 
between the State and the groups, with this difference, 
that the relation here was among local bodies and 
groups functioning in limited areas and not over the 
entire national field. The national state, represented 
by the King’s government, enveloped and sustained the 
villages and the groups together. 

Before discussing the types of village assemblies 

Groups. an ^ their working, the leading examples 

of the more limited groups may be 
briefly noticed.) In speaking of these groups and of 
the village assemblies themselves as corporations, we 
are to understand, not that there was in existence any 
formal system of incorporation by which groups attain- 
ed a particular legal status, but simply that they, in fact, 
acted like individuals, buying and selling, suing and 
being sued in their group capacity. They recognised 
also that the continuity of their life as corporations was 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


271 


independent of their changing personnel . 2 He who. 
runs may read from the inscriptions that this was the 
universal rule. { It was simply assumed that there was 
no difference in these respects between an individual 
and a group of persons banded together for a common 
purpose and well known as such in the neighbourhood. 
Such groups were organised for all sorts of purposes. 
Some were economic like the mercantile groups of 
Vajanjiyar, and the Manigramam, often named 
after the locality of their domicile A—Valanjlyar of 
Tiruppurambiyam , 3 Manigramam or Adittapura 4 are 
examples. These mercantile groups will come up for 
more detailed consideration in another connection. 
There were other groups, more numerous, organised on 
the basis of religion. The mulaparudaiyar of different 
localities were clearly in direct, charge of temples. In 
Suclndram, this body was functioning under the control 
of the local Mahasabha (assembly) from the time of 
Parantaka I to that of Rajaraja I; subsequently they 
threw up the management of the temple and restored it 
to the Mahasabha ; and having done this, they dissolved 
themselves . 5 We see here a body, constituted for a 
specific purpose, going out of existence when it is 
no longer able to function properly; and its duties 
thenceforth devolve on the Mahasabha. The Mula- 

* Studies, pp. 101, 129; 67 of 1898. 

*71 of 1897. 

4 33 of 1895. 

•82 of 1896. 85 of 1896. TAS . ii, p. 7. The dissolution of the body is 
a legitimate inference from 1. 14, which lays down punishment only for the 
members of the ParuQai going back on their agreement individually and 
not in their collective capacity. 



272 


THE COI...AS 


parudaiyar of Tiruk-kuda-mukkil are stated to be in- 
eharge of tlic affairs of the temple of Tirunagesvaram.® 
The priests attached to temples organised them- 
selves into groups with many picturesque names. The 
generic name for these priestly groups of Saivas was 
Sivabrahmanas ; those of Vaisnavas were called 
Vaikhanasas. Among the specific names of particular 
groups, the following may be given as examples: 
<Aga-naligai-Siva-brahmanar ; 7 pati-pada-mulattar , 8 
tiruvimnaligaik-kanap-perumakka ], 9 tiru-vunnaligai- 
sabhai . 10 The Pan-mahesvarar and the Srivaisnavas 
whose protection is lhvokdd at the end of almost every 
inscription recording a gift to the temples were the 
congregations of these sects, sometimes said to be 
spread over eighteen districts ( visayam or nadu) which 
are nowhere named . 11 Satta-ganam, Kumara-ganam, 
Krsna-ganam, Kali-ganam and other such groups were 
in the position of managers and trustees of single 

shrines from which thev took their names. The 

«- 

peril.amaiyar, and the sankarappadiyar 12 were other 

•214 of 1911. 

’629 of 1916. 

*39 of 1895; 117 of 1910. 

•120 of 1902. 

,0 145 of 1900; 239 of 1902. 

”640 of 1905; 519 of 1922. 

,2 Krishna Sastri suggests that SankarappSdi was a general name 
applied to the quarters in which the Saivas of a town lived. ($Jf. iii, 
p. 275, n. 1). It should he noted, however, that in almost all known 
instances, the SankarappSdiy&r have duties connected with the main- 
tenance of lamps and in particular the supply of oil — 547 of 1920, 
80 of 1897, 78 of 1898, etc. Two records imply moreover that they were a 
corporation of oil-mongers; in his second year, Kulottunga I ordered that 
25 families of §ankarapp34i should be settled in Tiruv&langhdu (NA.), in 
a new settlement called R&]5ndra-§dj[app&<)l and made responsible for the 
supply of oil for 15 lamps ( SII . iii, 65); an inscription from Achyuta- 
mangalam (Tj.) contains the expression: iekktt onrvkku fiankarappftQiydr 
p$r pannirari$u dga . (395 of 1925). 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


273 


bodies connected with, temples though their duties 
are obscure. There are other names of groups related 
to temples, but they need not be reproduced. There are 
also instances of local groups within a village, and 
professional groups. The villages were often divided 
into sen's, streets or quarters, and the people of each 
seri formed a group for certain purposes. Uttama 
Cola appointed the people of two seris of Kahclpuram 
to take charge of the Uragam temple and manage 
its affairs. 13 The seris of Uttaramerur f mined the 
basis of representation on the executive committees 
of the village assembly in the constitution agreed 
to in the twelfth year of Parantaka 1. 14 An 
inscription of A.D. 1103 1 5 from Pennadam mentions 
the sctbhas of the seris of Mudigonda-sola-caturvedi- 
mangalam, and in another instance the seris appear 
to have been represented on the panel of members 
for drafting resolutions of the assembly. 10 Examples 
of professional groups are the kalanais of lias, 
carpenters, goldsmiths, ironsmiths, and washermen 
in Talaiccangadu (Tanjore), 17 and the Manradik- 
kalanai (shepherds ?) in other places. 18 Some of these 

groups apparently ranked below others and were 
designated, accordingly, Idljc-kalanaigal . 1 9 

‘•Madras Museum plates. SlI. iii, p. 269, 11. 3-6, and 112-3. 

14 2 of 1898. 

,8 238 of 1929. 

iii, p. 177, contra Hultzsch. 

1T 198 of 1926. 

,8 697 and 620 of 1920. 

*•118 of 1888. 

K— 35 



274 


THE CO^AS 


In 1077, at Cebrolu, 20 an endowment of some lamps 
in the local temple was placed under the permanent pro- 
tection of the Sthanapati, and the three hundred ayyalu 
and the three hundred sdnuht of the place. At Kama* 
rasavalli, a body called the Seven-hund red-and-fi ft y took 
charge in 1096 21 of an endowment which involved the 
periodical collection of specified contributions and the 
maintenance, with the proceeds, of the worship and 
specified festivals in the temple. The ‘ cittiramelip- 
periya-nadu of the seventy-nine nadus’ act as 
judges in a case of accidental homicide during 
a hunting party at Jambai in the third year 
of Kulottunga II. 22 The Araiyar of the locality 
undertake the protection of a charitable endow- 
ment in Kunnandarkoyil (Pudukkottah) in the 
second year of Rajaraja II. 23 The bhattar, peri y a- 
nattdr and pannattar prescribe the prdyascitta, penance 
or expiation, for an accidental homicide at Olaldcur 
(South Arcot) in the fourth regnal year of Rajadhi- 
raja II, 24 — a function which was performed some years 
later by the pannattar alone at Velur in the same 
region. 53 In the nineteenth year of Kulottunga III, 
the periya-nattu-visayattar of twelve nadus gave some 
land as tirumdaiydttam to a temple in Nellore. 20 In 

I0 151 of 1897. 

*'73 of 1914. 

* 5 67 of 1906. The ‘elubattonbadu n&tt5m’ supervise the engraving on 
atone of a decision of the n<l$u and nagara of Utt&ttflr-n&gu in 1199. (621 
of 1912). 

“372 of 1914. 

“352 of 1909. 

*'106 of 1919. Also 77 of 1900. 

*•197 of 1894. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


275 


the same year a body called devaddnarndtta/var present 
a petition to Kulottunga III at Tiruvorriyur regarding 
the condition of a devaddna village. 87 In the twentieth 
year of Kulottunga III, the stMnattdr of the temple, 
the Rudra-mahesvaras, and the four families who acted 
as guardians of the temple (inndyandr kdppdrdna nalu 
Jcudyilom) accepted an endowment from a devaradiydl 
of the temple of Tirumananjeri-utlaiya-nayanar. 28 
Twelve years later, the authorities of the Visnu 
temple at Tirukkoyilur recovered from a certain 
Arattamukkidasan ten cows entrusted to his grand- 
father many years before ; evidently the terms 
of the original endowment had suffered neglect. 20 
The mahesvaras were present with the sablia of Tiru- 
naraiyur and the nddu of Kulottungasola-perilamai- 

nadu, when they enquired into and adjudged a ease of 
longstanding misappropriation of the live stock belong- 
ing to a temple. 30 This was in 1218. At Muniyuv in 
the Tanjore district, a high official of the central 
government, the niydyattdr of the town, the exe- 
cutive committee (of the dr) comprising nine persons 
and the trustees of the temple ( tdnottdr ) co-operated in 
engraving on the temple walls the title deeds of the 
temple relating to its iraiyili lands, as the deeds were 

in dan ger of being lost by decay. 31 The mahesvaras of 
Tirukkalar, Tanjore district, decided in 1234 that 

» '368 of 1911. 

J, Pd. 152. 

>»327 of 1921, which may be of th© reigu of Kulottunga 1. 

•<>543 of 1921. 

•‘610 of 1902. 



276 


THE CO^AS 


descendants in the female line could be held responsible 
for the performance of duties undertaken by their 
ancestors in accordance with the terms of a charitable 

endowment, and that they should continue to pay 
interest on money invested with the family . 32 These 
instances illustrate the variety of local corporations and 
the wide range of their interests and activities. We 
are not yet in a position, however, to determine the 
composition and mutual relations of these bodies as 
closely as may be desired. 


Social life was dominated by these innumerable 

Group relations. S T 0 U P S > alid tlle individual did not 

lack opportunities for self-expression. 
By birth, residence and occupation, and sometimes by 
choice, he was a member of one or more of these corpo- 
rate bodies, each devoted to a .specific local purpose. 
Mutual adjustment among these groups was largely a 
matter of goodwill. We do not come across many 
instances of intercession by government or by private 
parties for the regulation of group-relations. And 
there is no evidence in the works of the jurists that 
speculation on this fascinating aspect of jurisprudence 
ever advanced far in India. If these groups had acted 
in the spirit of enforcing their rights strictly and 
straining them to their utmost limits, the relations 
among them would easily have become too complicated 
to be settled without the aid of an intricate and nicely 
thought out system of positive law. The groups were 
there all over the land for several generations ; but they 


•««//. iii, 210. 



LOCAL. GOVERNMENT 


277 


did not give rise to any attempt at a precise definition 
of their rights and relations. Much must have been 
left to the play of goodwill on all sides. 


Of the village assemblies proper, we notice two 

types distinguished by the names Ur and Scfiiha. 

¥ ' 

A third kind of local assembly was the 
Types of N agar am confined to mercantile towns. 

Assemblies. All 0 f them were primary assemblies of 

the residents of the localities concerned, 
and, generally speaking, regulated all their common 
concerns. They were subject to general supervision, in 
particular a periodical audit of their financial transac- 
tions, by the officials of the king’s government. Other- 
wise, they were left to themselves. When important 
business was transacted by these assemblies, such 
as a change in their constitutional procedure or an 
alteration of land-rights affecting the revenues of 
government, their meetings were attended by the officers 
of the central government . 33 How much their presence 
influenced the proceedings it is not easy to determine. 
In some places, large temples were regularly managed by 
officials who also attended the meetings of the assembly, 
where the affairs of the temple came up for considera- 
tion . 31 Important matters w T ere sometimes taken up to 
the king for his decision ; two inscriptions of the reign 
of Kulottunga I from Tribhuvani show him regulating 
the enjoyment’ of a Kdni and laying down a scheme for 
the promotion of areca plantations at Tribhuvani . 35 


,S 1 and 2 of 1898; 692 of 1904; 335 of 1917; 178 of 1919; 348 of 1917. 
**152 and 154 of 1895. 

•^Oe. 201 of 1919. 



278 


THE CO^AS 


‘The Ur was the simplest type of these assemblies. 
' 0r> _ This word means ‘village’ or ‘town’; it 

j- „ t * * * 

is employed also in the sense of the 
assembly of the ur ; this becomes clear from' the phrase 

,.T*V * ' * ' “ ^ F* v 

urdy-isainda-iirdni/ meaning ‘residents of the village 
met as ur, ’ whicli occurs in some records ; and from the 
ur ordering, like the. sabha, the drafting and engraving 
of records by its agents . 36 The tir functioned in several 
places alongside ox the sabha, 3 ' actmg by itself or jointly 
with the sabha according as the business on hand 
required. On the other hand, the ur was the only 
assembly in other places. 


The Saibhd constitutes the type of which we 

get the most detailed accounts in 
a the inscriptions. It is invariably an 

assembly associated with the Brahmin village, — the 
Caturvedi-mangalam. Many of these ayraharas or 

v * ‘ 

mangalams were created by i*oyal grants. Faith in the 

-l J* K * " I ' 

unique merit of the gift of land ( bhu-dana ) was very 
common and frequently acted on by those who could 
afford it. Thus it came about that new colonies of 
pious and learned Brahmins were settled in the 
different parts of the country aint,g&p^ 
local affairs through the Sabha and its executive., 

Wu. , , u « -* * 1 * * ' " } 

*®Pd. 20, 59; 279 of 1903, and 285 of 1906. 

,T e.g. TiruvexumbGr, (112 and 123 of 1914); TiraimOr (201 and 216 
of 1907); Sevalai (362 of 1902); UttaramSrftr (89 of 1898) and so on. 
The assumption has been made that in the Ur and nagaram “all the condi- 
tions pertaining to membership in the Brahmanlcai sabh&s prevailed, except 
perhaps the knowledge of the Vedas/ 1 ARE. 1913, II, 23. There Is no 
evidence to support this. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


279 


The Sabhd and the Ur co-existed in places where a 

*%*#«&* , * * » *> * * i « - r ♦ * l \1 *** ' y-Wi * 

new settlement of Brahmins was super- 
Tueir relation. j m p 0se( [ on a more ancient eommuhity 

by the constitution of a mangalam. In almost every 

r 4 * Mi ** X * 1 f » * " , - * * l 

place, the advent of the new class of settlers must 
have been welcomed for many reasons. Often the land 
had to be purchased from its previous owners, indivi- 
duals or communities, before being made over by the 
king or the noble to the donees who were to form the new 
mangalam , and this resulted in a rise in land- values ; at 
any rate, it put the members of the ur in possession of 
much cash that they could put to good use. If the land 
sold had been common .property* as it sometimes was, 
the s jpro^e^.were,.\lse4,.in financing projects of public 
utility. Then the coming in of a group of persons, 
conspicuous for their learning and character, benefited 
the people by bringing them into touch with the best 
and highest culture available at the time, and giving 
them a class of natural leaders to whom they could turn 
for advice and guidance in their difficulties. The 
common people, continued to meet .astha &r and.carry nn 
their affairs as before; the newcomers - formed., them- 
selves into a sabhd ofikmusuftl-types Such, in outline, 
is the course of affairs one is led to postulate from the 
inscriptions of the period. 

Sometimes one village was organised as two ur- 
assembl ies for similar .reasons. About A.D. 1227, the 
village of Sattamangalam had twd assemblies, one of 
them made up of the residents of the Hindu devaddna 
part of the village, and the other of persons in the 



280 


THE C5{jAS 


Jaina Palliccandam ; both assemblies were called ur 
and they co-operated in setting apart some of the 
village land for a tank and flower-garden, and m'aking 
the land tax-free, by themselves undertaking to pay the 
taxes and dues thereon. 38 Similarly we find the consti- 
tution of a double-ur in two other villages, Kumara- 
mangalam and Amankudi in Urattur-kurram' in the 
modem Pudukkottah state, about A.D. 1245. 39 


Of the exact composition of the nr we have no 

direct knowledge. Prom the general 

c rs°: f a S; 

~ 1 " * ' ' ■V* • 

infer that the meeting was attended by 
all the residents m: the ur, though the leading part in the 
deliberations would have been taken by the elders. Tho 
Jtrniu^ called ‘almganam * ‘the ruling 

group’, a term which is sometimes shortened into 

ganam , or expanded into ' mi-ya lun-ganam \ 40 The 
numerical strength of this executive and the 
manner of its appointment are not known. We 
also find the term ‘ iir-alvurgal * which is doubtless 
another way of describing the ‘ ulunganam ’. 41 Some 
of the sabhas also appear . to . have . ha4 : -this 
form of a simple- executive which, .was responsible 
to them for all _ matters ; 42 for we find the 


names of .Bhattas (learned . Brahmins) among the 
members of some of the ganams. Another explanation 


* V* l" *V r+f*K 




••466 of 1912. 

•»Pd. 198. 

•°3 and 58 of 1898. 

«»40 of 1896. 

**m. Ill, 1; 237 of 1915; 234 of 1929. 



I 


LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


281 


may, however, be offered for this feature ; the bhattas 
who were members of the alunganam might have, in 
fact, been members the executive of the ur. In other 
words, they might have formed part of the original 
village and continued to do so, even after the constitu- 
tion of a man gal am with its sabha in the same place. ; 


An inscription of A.P. 1220 from Muniyur 4 * 
mentions the tandal and niyay attar of the ur besides 
nine persons whose names are preceded by the phrase : 
urlikuc-oamaindapadi, which may signify either that 
they represented the general assembly of the ur on the 
particular occasion or' that they formed the executive 
of the ur-assembly for the time being. 


As a rule the Sabha had a more complex 
and of Sabha. JS^Ui»ery~- a>f_,loca! . administration 


and functioned very largely through its 
committees called the ‘Vdriya ms\ The exact meaning 
of van yam , perhaps a Tamil word, is somewhat 
obscure;' a connection with ‘Van’, ‘income’ in Tamil, 
‘rigorous demand’ in Kanarese, 44 may be suggested. It 
is equally possible that vdriyam is a Tamilised Sanskrit 
word, m qapiog chosen ’ ; in fact one 

The vanyam. inscription employs the expressions 

‘varan am seydaV for the act of choosing, 

body of the sabha. 45 

^ "i * ** *■*> * ‘V - * *■» , . . 

‘ * * * * , » «* t V 4 -** - 

And the tei*m * vdriyar * denotes persons employed by 


••610 of 1909. 

<4 Kittel, s. v. v&rl. 133 of 1914 (RiLjak. 5) has the expression: 
ivvttxiQu M-k6i/il v&ri sSyginra sabha i-vCtriyar. 

♦*113 of 1928. 

K—36 



282 


THE Cd^AS 


the Sabha in specified duties. When the Mulaparudai 
of Sueindruin ceased to manage the local temple, the 
sabha appointed two variyar to do this work on their 
behalf. And the Pandya inscription at Manur, to 
which reference has already been made, lays down that 
no kind of ‘variyam’ was to be entrasted to persons who 
did not possess certain qualifications. The early 
history of the variyam is very obscure. But enough 
evidence remains to show that the systematic employ- 
ment of committees for executive work in rural admini- 


stration was the result of a fairly long period of 
experiment, trial and error. In the earlier stages such 
work may have been done by individuals or very 
small groups. What looks very much like an ad hoc 
variyam for a specified temporal *} 7 purpose is mentioned 
in an inscription from Srmivasanallur ; 40 its precise 
date cannot be determined as the ruling king is described 


in it only by the title Rajakesari, but there is little doubt 
that it is an early Cola inscription. (This variyam is 
appointed, not by the territorial sabha, But "by the 
mulaparudai of Mahendramangalam in charge of the 
tocaTterriplc ; and the duty entrusted to the variyam was 

to describe authoritatively and record the extent of the 

. . ^ 

irqiyiU devaddna lands of the temple.J There must have 
been several other instances of similar special vdriyams 


appointed for specific, purposes. Whether the expe- 
rience gathered from such experiments led to the growth 
and spread of the system of vdriyams in local admini- 


stration, or whether the machinery of committees 


4 *596 of 1904: vdrigam vaittu vaikfcappaffa vdrigarum kanakkttm 

irttndu. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


283 


evolved by the sabha in its active working was adapted 
by the other corporations, cannot now be decided. A 
■nila-variyan of Tirukkadaiyur is mentioned as late as 
1194, and he was doubtless an official under the sabha,.* 7 


. The inembcj'&of the executive, connnitte.es of, the sabhds > 
were generally called ‘ variyapperumakkal’.** ^ 


The number and descriptions of the ‘Vari yams’ 
differed in different sabhas, as also the method of their 
appointment. . The best known example of the consti- 
tution of such vdriyams is that of the sabha of 
U ttaramerur, a village still flourishing under that very 
name in the Chingleput district and preserving many 
interesting vestiges of its past glory. \The large irriga- ' 
tion tank within a couple of miles to the west of the 
neatly planned village is doubtless the celebrated 
,V airamegha-tataka of the Pallava and Cola inscriptions 
in Uttaramerur, a tank which occupied much of the ' 
attention of the sabha in those days and was placed 

under the management of a special 
uttaramSrfir. Tank-committee (the eri-variyam). In 


the twelfth year of Parantaka I, 4n A.D. 919, the sabha 
adopted a resolution fixing the method of apj>ointment 
to its executive committees, of which five were named. 
This resolution ( vyavastha ) was taken in the presence 


4T 43 of 1906. 

Penmakkay literally means ‘Great men’. 

i0 ASL 1005; Studies — ch. vi. 176 of 1030 furnishes another 
example from the reign of Parantaka I of the sabha of NinjuvOr 
emphasising the importance of the kudumbu (ward) in the conduct of 
the affairs of the sabha . It lays down that each kadumbu was to be 
represented in all discussions by two persons who had not taken such 
part in discussions before (pan4u rtwcnr&di criyddar). For other provi* 
slons of the record relating to revenue affairs, salary of madhyastha and 
so on, see ARE, 1930, II, 16. 



284 


THE CO^AS 


of the official of the king's government specially deputed 
for the purpose by a royal order (sri-mukham) . 
The central object of the arrangement adopted was 
to secure on the committees a fair representation 
i not only for the thirty kudwmbus (wards) into which 
the whole village was divided, but for the twelve 
scris (streets) into which the wards were grouped. 
The actual method of selection was by lot (kudu- 
volai ) ; 50 but selection A\ r as confined to those who 
were duly nominated by the kudumbtts according 
to mles which laid down certain conditions which 
had to be satisfied by every person before he 
became eligible for such nomination. The attempt 
to combine the representation on the committees of the 
kudumbu and of the seri did not Avork, and as the result 
of the breakdoAAm that folloAved, another effort was 
made, two years later, to reform the method of election 
to the committees. The seri was alloAAed to fall into the 
background, and the direct representation of the 
kudumbus on the committees became the only aim. But 

the occasion of the revision was used to clarify other 
doubtful questions that had cropped up in the interval, 
and to make more detailed and specific regulations for 
the nominations by the kudwmbus. This revision of the 
constitution was also carried out in the presence of 
a king’s official and recorded in the form of a vyavasthd 
of the sabha. The very next year, the fifteenth of 

# fl Bits of palm-leaf on which were written the names of eligible 
persona were thrown into a narrow-mouthed pot and well shaken in the 
presence of the whole assembly; and a child was asked to take out one 
after another as many of the hits as were required for the purpose of the 
constitution of the committees. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


285 


Parantaka I (A.D. 922) the sabha appointed another 51 
committee for assaying gold for all people in the village ; 
this was not a new vdriyam; it was a committee of eight 
persons chosen by lot from among citizens who paid 
taxes, were residents in particular quarters of the 
village, and had made a name for assaying gold. This 
committee was perhaps intended to assist the 

pon-vdriyam (gold-committee) of the sabha in the per- 
formance of their work. 


Other Sabhas. 


Of the constitution and working of no other sabha 

do we have such detailed knowledge as 
of that of 17 ttaramerur. By their refe- 
rences to the variyums in other places, however, the 
inscriptions lead us to suppose that the method of 
entrusting details of executive work to committees was 
generally followed by tlieother sabhas, when they found 
such details too much for a single executive committee. 
The work was honorary, no payment for it being 
suggested in any of the records, and no one could be 
expected to give more than a part of his time and 
energy for such work ; the division of labour among a 
number of committees, the number being varied from 
time to time, was the most natural device to adopt, and 
so it was adopted. 52 Two inscriptions from Tenneri of 
the eleventh year of Rajaraja I, A.D. 996, show the 
gradual spread from one place to another of these expe- 
dients of rural administration. One of these inscrip- 

^ 4 i , 1 * t ■* 

tions records a resolution of the sabha of tJttamasola- 

H . . I * * , '' , 1 1 ' f * 


‘’12 of 1898. 

“ABE. 1905, II, 7. 



286 


THE CO^AS 


Caturvedi-mangalam that only members learned in the 
Mantra-Brahmana were eligible for service on the 
variyam and for drafting the. resolutions of the 
assembly , 53 and that anv one who contravened their 
resolution should be liable to the same punishment as 

•w*. ^ , * * 

those who disobeyed the king’s orders . (tiruvdnai- 
maruttdr-padum dandam) .{Less than two months after 
the date of this resolution, the same sabha took another 
resolution calculated to exclude from the privileges of 
serving on the variyam and drafting the resolutions of 
the assembly, persons who had been found guilty of 
theft of a Brahmin’s property and other offences of a 
more serious nature \ mel-padu-k urram ) . The simple 


and piecemeal nature of these resolutions, and their 
dates, are proof, if proof were required, of the imeven 
pace kept by the numerous sablui s in the development 
of their constitution and administrative practice. And 
no official of the king’s government attended the sessions 
of the sabha of Uttama-sola Caturvedi-mangalam when 
these resolutions were taken. In fact the sabhds were 
left largely to themselves, and each sabha, was free to 
make the arrangementsthatbestsuiteditsownpeculiar 
conditions. No fewer than nine variyams are enume- 
rated, for instance, as having been set up by the sabha 
of Amani-narayana Caturvedi-mangalam in the third 
year of Parthivendravarman f* while only four 


s *240 and 241 of 1922. The phrase “Babha-m&xrafi-jollavum” cannot 
simply mean 'speak in the sabha*. The inscriptions often say that they 
are recorded to the dictation (iolla) of some person who is generally a 
Bhafta; and I think ' 4 Sabh&-m&rra&-jollu” has reference to this process 
of dictating for record the conclusions reached by the sabhft. The simnle 
form occurs in 60 of 1926. 

• W. iii, 156, 11. 14. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


287 


variyams are mentioned in a record of A.D. 919 from 
Tirupparkadal. 05 

( There are not wanting, on the other hand, instances 
in which the king’s government interfered to regulate 
the constitutional arrangements prevailing in the 
sabhas. They belong generally to the late Cola period. 
Even in these instances, it is possible, though by no 
means clear, that the initiative was taken by the sabhds 
themselves, and that the terms of the constitutional 
settlement reported to the king by his officials and sanc- 
tioned by him were based on resolutions taken by the 
assemblies concerned. The inscriptions, however, con- 
tain only the record of the sanction accorded by the 
monarch to proposals placed before him by his own 
officials. An inscription from Talainayar ( Tan j ore 
district), dated the 73itl day of the seventh regnal 
year of Kulottunga III, 50 takes the form of a letter 
addressed to the sabha of Kul6ttunga-s6lan-tani-nayak%- 
caturvedi-mangalam and the tanduvdn (collector) of 
the village. The letter contains rules for the election 
of the executive body ( kuttam ) of the assembly 57 sanc- 
tioned by the king at the instance of two officials, 
Brahmendra and Yanadliiraja, written out by the 
tirumandira-olai and attested by nine others with titles 
ending in raya or raja, also no doubt officials of the 
central government. The rules laid down were the 

»V * k , <« r ^ - ** / ' *•' v * 1 •***-«* ' * ” " * 

following : from the seventh regnal year, only those were 

"811. ill, 99. 

•‘148 of 1927. ARE. 1927, II, 28. 

"For kilpfam (executive) of other assemblies see: 581 of 1907, 527 of 
1918, 231 of 1925. 



288 


THE CO^AS 


to be elected to, the kuttam who had not been in the 

kuttam for ten years preceding the year in which the 

* fc * * 1 

election took place ; the candidates must also be 
Brahmins above forty years of age, learned ( vidvan ) 
and impartial (samar) ; the relatives of those 
who had served on the kuttam during the five 
years before and the five years after the 

seventh regnal year were also to be held ineligible 
for the kuttam. The king also ordered that all 
Brahmins who were guilty of wicked deeds ( vinaik - 
kedu) by defaulting the land revenue ( kadamai ) and 
oppressing docile Brahmins and respectable tenants, 
accepting bribes ( kaikkiili ) and so on, were to be fined 
in proportion to their offences, irrespective of whether 
they had served on the kuttam or not. This last clause, 
together with the requirement of impartiality in the 
candidates for election under the new rules, warrants 
the supposition that local administration in Talainayar 
had suffered by the growth of faction and violence for 
some time before the reform recorded in this inscrip- 
tion. Another instance of the royal sanction of a local 
constitution is dated five years later, A.D. 1190, and 
comes from Ayyampettai. 88 At the instance of Nulam- 
badaraya, the king ordered that the executive 
( varanam ) of the sabhd of Rajendra-sola-caturvedi- 
mangalam were to be chosen from among those who had 

not served on it before and were not less than forty years 
of age. 


**113, 120 of 1928 — the two numbers being apparently duplicates of 
the same record. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


289 


( Lest it should be thought that village assemblies as 
a rule lost their initiative and passed under the 
control of the central government in the late Cola 
period, it may be noted that the mahasabha of ( 
Kamadavalli-caturvedimangalam resolved in A.D. 1232 / 
to adhere to an earlier decision of theirs to constitute <• 
their executive ( grdmakaryam ) from am'ong those who 
agreed to serve on the basis of a yearly tenure; 59 and 
there is no evidence of any reference to the central 
government on either occasion. Likewise, the maha- 
sabha of fSembiyanmahadevi resolved of their own 
accord not to hold meetings of the executive at night 
for purposes of local administration (grama-karyam) 
and for considering revenue affairs (kadamaik- 
kariyam), as nocturnal meetings resulted in inefficient 
work ( upahati ) and extra expenditure of oil for lamps. 
They fixed the day from which the new arrangement 
came into force. They also resolved not to reappoint 
any person to the executive (kilt tarn) within five years 
after one term of office. 60 The inscription is dated in 
the seventeenth year of Rajaraja III. The distinction 
made here between grama-karyam, local affairs, and 
kadamaik-kariyam, revenue business, deserves to be 
particularly noted. Though this distinction is not 
expressly found in other records, we are justified in 
assuming that it was observed universally by all the 
village assemblies which had definite responsibilities 
both towards the locality concerned and towards the 
central government. ’, 

«»92 of 1914 — Munbu pannina vyavastliaippatfiyS-samvatsara-taranam- 
dga a m enxdrai k-koMu granid-Mryan-jeyyak-kaQav/im-aga. 

”500 of 1925. 

K— 37 



290 


THE COjiAS 


There is lastly an inscription 60 ” of the thirteenth 
year of the reign of Rajaraja III from fienganur 
( Tan j ore district) which is of unusual importance to 
the study of local institutions in the late Cola period. 
It is a record of constitutional and other arrangements 

v r 

'relating to the assembly of the village (the Main i- 
sabhd). The interesting point here is that these 
arrangements are decreed by the muhtparmai of the 


temple of Visvesvaradeva : 


Visvesvaradevay ho nil 


mulaparusaiydr k iltta ugnra i vara k-k fi <] i iru ndu grdma- 
kdriyam vyavastluii pannina padi, a clear statement 
that the mdlaparusai ( mdla-pan'saf ) of the temple 
framed the regulations that follow in the inscription 
for the conduct of the affairs of the village. It is not 


clear why the Mahdsabhd (mentioned further on in the 


record), instead of following the usual rule of itself 
regulating its own affairs, left the decision of import- 
ant issues to the mulaparusai ; we may surmise, how- 
ever, from the trend of the record as a whole that the 
Mahdsabhd was unable to reach satisfactory decisions 
* on account of sharp differences, and felt the need for 
laying the whole matter before some external authority 
for arbitration. If this view is correct, it is not without 


significance that the Mahdsabhd sought the assistance 
of another local authority, rather than of the king’s 
government ; it may be that by the end of the reign of 
Rajaraja III, the central government, having lost its 
efficiency, failed to command the confidence of the 
people. In fact, one of the rules made on this occasion 
shows that in this period the officials of the king’s 


*•*89 of 1932; ARE, 1932. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


291 


government ( mudaliyal ) even disturbed the smooth 
working of local institutions by their intrigues with 
particular factions. 


The rules that follow are reasoned statements of 
the decisions reached, and we see that the mulaparusai 
were fully alive to the extraordinary and difficult 
nature of tlieir task on this occasion. The first resolu- 
tion relates to the constitution of the executive 
administration (kuttam) of the village: there was an 
immemorial practice ( anddiydya vyavasthai) that, 
when the executive of the village was chosen 
( na-mmurk-kuttam idum idatiu), those who had once 
served could serve again only in the fifth year there- 
after, their sons only in the fourth year and their 
brothers in the third, and this ancient- practice was to 
be maintained; only those who were not less than forty 
years of age were to be chosen; the kuttam should be 
chosen after obtaining the consent, ‘as our ancestors 
did’ ( purvapurusdyal seydapadik-kiddga) , of the 
villagers assembled as the ur; any persons who got in 
by fraud ( ulvari , lit. disguise) with the support of the 
officials ( mudaliyal ) of government or in violation 
of these rules, would be deemed to be traitors to the 
village, all their properties being confiscated ; the 


kuttam was to be chosen every time for one year 
( samvatsara-varanam ) ; any persons that stayed on 
longer (merpadi ninrdr ) would also be considered 
gramadrohis and punished as above. The appeal’ to 
th,e mos ma jorum, the stress laid on the consent of the 
the protest against undue influence by the 
madaligal and the deterrant punishment laid down 



292 


THE COtiAS 


against attempts to capture the executive by improper 
methods or to prolong the period of office beyond the 
proper term, are all features of the resolution that 
deserve to be noted. Let us observe this also : how the 
- choice of the executive was actually made, we are not 
told; nor do we hear of how the consent of the Ur was 
expressed ; obviously our record does not tell the whole 
story, but sets down only the decisions on a few points 
that had come under discussion, the rest being a matter 
of common knowledge at the time. 


The rest of the vyavasthd relates to matters of 
revenue and financial administration. "When collect- 
ing the kadamai and kuditnai (general revenue) dues 
of the village and the sabJiaviniydgam (local cesses), 
the members of the kuttam should collect only the 
legitimate dues ( prdptam ) and not anything in excess 
thereof; the sabhaviniyoyam was not to be mixed up 
with the kudimai, but collected separately, and 
expended in accordance with written orders separately 
communicated to the accountant ( kanakkan ukk ti- 
ny ogam eludik-koduttu ) ; if the expenditure on any 
single item (ora porulukku) exceeded 2000 kd-sus, the 


written sanction of the Mahamblia had to be obtained 
before the expenditure was incurred; if any expendi- 
ture was incurred otherwise than in accordance with 
these rules or any excess collection (of taxes and dues) 
was made, a fine of five times the amount involved was 
to be collected, which together with the proceeds of penal 
assessment on persons who had arrears of revenue 
(they had to pay double the original assessment) went 
into the coffers of the sabha (sabhdviniydgam). Lastly, 
the accountant of the village and the officers of the 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


293 


vdriyam and the kudumbu were to change ann ually 
and carry out the orders lawfully issued to them — 
undo, mdri niyogappadi nirkak-kadavaddgavum. We 
have no means of ascertaining the exact role of the 
vdriyam and the kudumbu in this village and our 
knowledge of the actual working of these institutions 
here, as elsewhere, must remain imperfect. 

The sabha , mahdsabhd, , and the corresponding 
Tamil words, kuri and perun-guri, refer to the same 
institution, which is sometimes even called pertmguri- 
mahdsabhai. Its members are collectively referred to 
as perumakkal, and the honorific term ' tiruvadiydr ’ is 
also employed in some inscriptions. The sabha, usually 
held its meetings in the temples and mandapas of the 

village, and the term Brahnm-sthana 01 appears to 

indicate the fixed meeting place of the sabha wherever 

*» 

there was one. Sometimes it met outside the village 
on the banks of a tank or under a tree ; this was certainly 

not due to the lack of a more sheltered place for the 
meeting. Some examples of such meetings are best 
accounted for by assuming that the inauspicious nature 
of the business transacted required that it should be 
done beyond the living quarters of the village . 62 The 
sabha was usually summoned by the beating of a drum 
( sdrri ) ; the meeting was also proclaimed by sound of 
bugle ( kdlam ) or a double bugle ( irattaik-kdlum) .° 3 
Meetings were also held at nights when required. 

r f v - * 

“30 of 1894; 241 of 1922. 

“260 of 1916, also 332 of 1910. ARE. 1910, 11. 21; 640 of 1919. 
Studies, p. 94. . 

“653 of 1921; 86 of 1896; 72 of 1914; 103 of 1897. 



294 


THE COfcAS 


The N agar aim was another type of local assembly, 

not so much hi evidence, however, as the 

Nagaram. _ 

Ur and the Sabha. The same term is 
sometimes employed lo designate occupational groups 
like Saliyanagarattom . 64 But when the Nagaram of 
places like Sivapuri , 05 Tiruppalanam 60 Parakesari- 
puram ,' 17 and Takkolam,"* ** and the Ma-nagaram of 
Kanci 09 are in question, we are dearly dealing with 
territorial assemblies which, by their status and 
functions, had much in common with the Sabha and the 
Ur. In some places like Tillaisthanam , 70 the Nagaram 
and the Ur seem to have carried on their duties side by 
side. 

The Nagaram was in all probability a primary 
assembly of merchants, which was organised as one of 
the local assemblies in important trade centres and was 
the only assembly hi places where the mercantile 
interests overshadowed all the rest. 

t « 

Territorial assemblies representing the ndda were 

N _ , also in existence and discharged im- 

portant duties, particularly in regard to 
land revenue administration. ‘Nadu’ like Ur generally 
means a territorial division, and the corporate character 

r f 

of ‘nddu’ in some of the contexts in the epigraphs is 

• 4 268 of 1921, also mentions Viy&p&ri-nagarattOm . 

**243 of 1894. 

••165 of 1928. 

• 7 66 of 1895. 

«*6 of 1897. 

•*76 of 1921. 

*•40 Of 1895. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


295 


brought home to us by expressions like “ ndddy- 
i sain da ndttom”, “residents of the nddu met (formed) 
as ■ nddu ”. n These corporations endow charities in 

their own names, 72 and take charge of charitable endow- 
ments. 73 In the fifteenth year of a Parakesari, a 
certain Kandan Maravan, the feudatory of the Cola 
monarch, issued an order to the nattar of Kunrak- 

kiirram. 74 This order stated that the chief had decided 
#• •• 

to make a gift of some land as leant to a certain person 
subject ton fixed annual payment of 25 pon for all time 
as the land tax on it; on no future occasion, when a 
general revision of assessment was made, was this land 
to be put in a class which would raise the dues from it to 
more than the sum of 25 pon then fixed ; the nattar were 
requested by the chieftain to give effect to these condi- 
tions, and they accordingly handed over the land to the 
person named and undertook not to enhance the tax due 
from the land in any future assessment. The part 
assigned by this inscription to the nattar in the classifi- 
cation of the lands and the periodical assessment of land 
revenue, and the permanent settlement of the assessment 
on some land are all noteworthy features of the land- 
revenue administration of the time.': The order of 
Rajaraja on the gift of the village Anaimangalam to the 
Buddhist shrine in Negapatam was addressed among 
others to the nattar of the Pattinakkurram* \ No direct 
evidence on the constitution of these assemblies of the 
nddu is forthcoming; an analysis of the signatures 

”Pd. 38. 

”217 of 1926; 411 of 1912; Pd. 85. 

’•Pd. 36. 

’*356 of 1924. 



296 


THE CO^iAS 


affixed to the Leyden grant (of Anaimangalam) is, 
however, very instructive in this connection. The 
grant is signed first by the officer of the 
puravu-vari who was present with the ndttar when 
they marked the boundary of the village r>y 
getting an elephant to beat the bounds, then by 
the man who rode the elephant on the occasion, then 
bv the accountants of twenty-seven villages, including 
Anaimangalam, in the Pattinakkurrnm, and lastly by 
the bJiattas who guided the whole transaction. The 
accountants sign on behalf of the sabhd or the fir of their 
villages and in accordance with their instructions. One 
winders if the assembly of the nddu was constituted by 
the representatives of each of the villages in it coming 
together, the accountants being present among them. 

In the tenth year of Kulottunga I, 75 the ndttar of 

Puramalai-nadu are seen appointing a pujdri (priest, to 
conduct the worship) in the temple at Tlrthamalai in 
the Salem district. The nddu of Vada-panangadu in 
Pudukkottah resolved in A.D. 1149 to levy a fine of one 
tna of arable land to be assigned to the temple for any 
injury caused by ambanavar ( ?) to arable land or on 
the highways in and near Nal-vayalur. 7e An inscrip- 
tion from Jambai dated in the reign of a Karikala- 
Coladeva 77 assigns an important part to the nddu of 
Vanagappadi in the conduct of the affairs of the temple 
of V alaiy ur-nakkar-y ogavanar ; the donor, a chieftain 


’*676 of 1905. 

’•373 Of 1914 (Pd. 186). 
”109 of 1906. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


297 


of Ban a extraction, states that his ancestors had 
assigned to the temple the village of Ranabluma- 
mangalam; he then increases the endowment and the 
scale of expenses, and entrusts the proper observance of 
the new scale to the nddu. It is also of interest to note 
that under the general supervision of the nddu, the 
details of the management were carried on by one 
single village chosen by lot ( hudavdlai ) for each 
year — a provision which emphasises the relation 
between the assembly of the nddu and the village- 
assemblies suggested by the Leyden grant of a 
much earlier time. Another inscription of the 
late Co]a period from Kahcipuram , 78 records 
what is apparently an approval by Madliurantaka 
Pottappiccoja, the Telugu-Coda king of the time, 
of a resolution of the nddavar of Jayangonda- 
solamandalam remitting six leal am s of paddy from 
the hadamai due on each veil of land that 
was tirappu, or devaddna, tiruvidaiydttam, pallic - 
cavdam, agarapparru, madappnram, jlvitapparru, 
padaipparru and vanni yapparru. This enumeration of 
the types of holdings is apparently meant to be exhaus- 
tive and to include all the productive lands in the nddu; 
the instance before us is therefore one of a general 
revenue-remission initiated by the nddu and approved 
by the ruler of the locality, clear proof of the 
vitality of the assembly of the nddu even so late as 
the thirteenth century. The ndttavar are also found 
often co-operating with other corporations and with 

"556 of 1919. 

K— 3« 



298 


THE CO^AS 


individual officials in the administration of justice and 
in other matters . 79 

{ The nagaram and nddu of the Tamil inscriptions 
are, in their names, if nothing else, the exact counter- 
parts of the panra and jdnapada respectively of 
Sanskrit literature. Whether the village assemblies 
called Ur and Sablia in Southern India were known to 
the Sanskritic writers on Indian polity, and whether 
the assemblies must be taken to have been included 
under the generic term jdnapada, are questions not 
easily decided at present. ! 


The procedure that was followed in the conduct of 


business at the meetings of the various bodies so far 


Procedure. 


mentioned is not described in any of -lie 
inscriptions. Even the method em- 


ployed in the choice of the executive of the assemblies 
remains unknown to us except in the case of Uttara- 
meriir. Regarding the executive bodies of other 
villages, we learn something of their qualifications and 
tenure of office, but nothing' of the actual mode of their 
appointment. We must assume that membership in 
the general assembly was unrestricted and open to all 
the residents of the village ; the inscriptions sometimes 
state expressly that the meeting was fully attended, 
everybody young and old being present. 79 ” There is no 
evidence that the idea of a quorum was known; bu( 
definite methods of summoning meetings and giving 


' "Co-operation with SambuvarByar in the reign of Kulottunga li- 
st of 1900. 


**■62 of 1898; (Studies , p. 121. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


299 


notice of them were prescribed, and the expression 
often employed, k uttakkara ivara-k a di iriindu , 7!)b indi- 
cates that importance was attached to the presence of 
all the members of the executive for the time being. 
There is also no evidence that votes were taken; as 
each question came up, there must have been a general 
discussion in which the leading men took part in 
accordance with their social status, and if the matter 
was one affecting any class in particular, the represen- 
tatives of that class had every chance of explaining 
their point of view; the final decision was reached by 
common agreement. Rules were sometimes made, as 
in the Manur assembly, against factious opposition and 
attempts to hold up business by obstnictionism ; 
obviously the enforcement of such rales depended on 
the support of public opinion. The procedure at 
meeting's seems on the whole to have been rudimentary, 
and the assemblies had, but for their executives, hardly 
outgrown the stage of folk-gatherings. 


These local assemblies often co-operated with one 

cooperation another and with other corporations 

among assemb- j 1A pursuance of common objects. The 

sabhd of Tiraimur, the nagaram and 
the devakanmis of a temple in Tiruvidaimarudur were 
together responsible for the proper management of the 
temple and when they transacted its business, they met 
in the theatre ( natakasald ) of the temple . 80 The 
emoluments of the servants of another temple at 
Tiruvamattur were fixed at a common meeting of the 


»»bg II. ill, 77. 

50 199 of 1907; 154 of 1895* 



300 


THE COLAS 
* 


sabha of the place, the ur, the Sivabrahmanas, the 
Rudragana who sang sacred hymns before god, and the 
servants of the temple including the itvaccar . 8l The 
presence at the meeting of the servants whose emolu- 
ments were being fixed implies that this was not done 
without some regard for their wishes in the matter, a 
typical instance of the elastic and humane character of 
the economic arrangements of the time. Again the 
priests of a temple at Polonnaruva and other servants 
on its establishment are, together with the ndttavar of 
the division, 82 placed in charge of a cash endowment 
for a lamp. There is one instance on record of the 
sabhds of two neighbouring villages coalescing and 
agreeing that the two villages should thenceforth count 
as one. 83 This happened in the reign of Parantaka I, 

A.D. 933, and constitutes a measure of the freedom 
enjoyed by these local bodies. The union of villages was 
the result of their voluntary choice and was effected 
without any direct reference to the central government. 
The grant of braJmiadeya or devaddnu in its execution 
involved the co-operation of many organised groups. 
A typical instance is the grant of Palaivanur, 
which is put through by the nattar of Palaiyanur-nadu 
with the assistance of the elders 84 of brakmadeya 
villages, the CiryaUldr of all Rra including devadana, 


*’18 of 1922. The uvaccar are pipers and drummers who play on 
their musical instruments during the services in tempie. 

*-594 of 1912. See also 28 of 1919 for another such instance from 

Mark&ham. 

iii, pp. 145, 147; (MI. ii, p. 370). 

««The text is * Kilavar \ rendered into ‘headmen* by Krishna Sastri, 
See also 39 of 1895 for brahmadeyak-kijnvar . 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


301 


palliccandam, hmimurrattu, vettipperu and old 
aracculabhoya and the nacjarama . s5 This enumeration 
of co-operating local authorities is of interest in two 
ways : it mentions some special tenures by which land 
was held; these will be discussed elsewhere. And it 
shows clearly that the assembly of the nadu ( nattar ) 
was a body distinct from the assemblies of the 
villages {dr gal) and towns (nagarangal). Unlike the 
Leyden grant which is addressed to local groups in more 
or less the same terms and is signed by the representa- 
tives of all villages and towns in the nadu, this grant, 
from Tiruvalangaclu, is attested only by the villages 
whose land rights were affected by the gift, besides the 
officials of the revenue department. Except for this 
difference in detail the two grants remarkably confirm 
each other, and imply that the assembly of the 'nadu 
was made up of representatives from the assemblies of 
all the villages and towns in the division . 80 Instances 
are not wanting of a number of such assemblies of the 
nadu co-operating for some common purpose . 87 




Local j 


Local Govern- 
ment. 


idininisrtation was thus carried on by means 
of. primary assemblies in the villages 
and towns, and representative assem- 
blies in the larger divisions. The 


sabha, the ur and the nayaram were of the nature of 


t!5 xS7i. iii, p. 402, 11. 2-5; see also EL xv. Anbil plates, 1. 124; SIX. iii f 
142, 11. 4-8; Leyden grant, 1. 113. 

60 See p. 296 ante. 

• T 103 Of 1921. 



302 


THE CdLAS 


folk meetings in which every one who had a stake in 
the locality was entitled to be present. This becomes 
evident from the manner of summoning these meetings, 
which was by a general proclamation, by beat of drum 
or other suitable means, of the time and place of the 
meeting. The formula is often employed in describing 
these meetings that they were quite fully attended; the 
young and the old having assembled together after due 
notice of the meeting had been given. There is not a 
single instance on record of a decision having been 
reached by the method of voting; and it does not seem 
likely. The political spirit of the time, such as it was, 
aimed at securing the harmony of classes, rather than 

their equality. A healthy society based on a general 
distribution of small properties, which was free from 
the glaring economic oppression of one class by 
another, had no particular use for the ideals 
of modern democracy. Social life was dominated 
by groups rooted in ancient custom and ideal right, 
and was subtly suffused with emotions of a quasi- 
religious nature. All that was demanded in such 
an atmosphere was an opportunity to watch the course 
of affairs, and to raise a protest if anything went 
wrong, or to press a point of view that was being over- 
looked. This was furnished by the periodical meetings 
of the assemblies and the groups; but the leadership in 
such gatherings remained with those naturally fit for 
it. Age, learning, and wealth, in addition to birth, 
furnished the most obvious* qualifications for such 
leadership; official standing and public benefactions 
were other claims to the consideration and homage of 
the average man. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


303 


That the villages were little ‘ republics ’ which had 

a large measure of autonomy in the 
Local taxation, management of their own affairs is 

seen from the powers of taxation 
for local purposes, and of granting exemptions from 
such taxes and dues, enjoyed by their assemblies, and 
from the separate administrative staff, comprising 
doubtless only a few officials, employed and controlled 
by them. Of their power of taxation for local purposes, 
an idea may be formed from the instances in which the 
assemblies grant remissions and assignments of dues 
without any reference to the king’s government and 
in the exercise of their own powers. In the second 
year of a Rajakesari, the sabhd of Nalur ss assigned, in 
perpetuity, to the local temple to which they owed some 
money, the proceeds of a local cess on shops (augadik- 

kuli) in lieu of the interest on the loan. The nagarattdr 
of Kumara-mattandapurain 80 made over their annual 
income from vdrd-vaigal , — a cess of which the nature is 
not clear, — towards a fund for maintaining a Jaina 
shrine in good repair. At Tiruveniinbur, the sabhd of 
Srikantha-caturvedimangalam resolved that no dues 
of any kind should be levied on the properties of the 

temple on their account from the date of the resolu- 
tion ; f)0 they got on another occasion a lump sum payment 
from a person as they wanted cash for digging a tank, 
and in consideration thereof assigned to him the right 


••321 of 1910. 

••222 of 1911. 

••133 of 1914; 105 of 1914. 



804 


THE CO^AS 


exercised till then by the assembly of collecting paddy 
at a certain rate from the cultivators of the village. 
The ur of Ujliyur obtained a number of exemptions in 
perpetuity on behalf of a temple in their hamlet, and 
these were pronounced by the sabha of Uttarameriir 
who granted them to be free from the interference of 
all extraneous powers." 1 In these and many other 
instances of a. similar nature, the village assemblies were 
clearly disposing of rights that were exclusively vested 
in them and that they were free to utilise in any manner 
calculated to advance the social good of the 1 ittle commu- 
nity whose affairs they managed. These assignments 
and remissions of the taxes and dues collected by them- 
selves should not he confused with another class of tax 


remissions for which the village assemblies became 
responsible. In the latter class of cases, in lieu of a 
lump sum payment made in advance to it, the assembly 
undertakes to pay all dues to the local and central 


governments on particular plots of land for all time. 
The lump sum in these instances was the capitalised 
value of the annual dues chargeable to the land, and 


was generally called irai-dravijam- or 


irai-kaval . 9 - 


Possibly the term pit ravacaram? 3 


which occurs in some 


inscriptions in a similar context has the same meaning. 
Such advance payment in a lump sum of future taxes 


was due to two general causes. First, persons who 
endowed charities by setting apart land, often 


desired to secure for such land freedom from all dues 


•Ml of 1898. 
•MOO of 1892. 
•• 14 of 1898. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


S05 


and imposts, and the common way of doing this was 
to pay their capitalised value to the assembly of the 
village where the land was located, making them 
responsible for all future payments. Secondly, the 
assemblies, on their own initiative, often raised money 
in this manner for immediate capital expenditure 
for public purposes, which could not be financed 
otherwise. The sabhd of Sirrdnaicciir, a braJimadeya, 
for instance, owed a considerable sum of money to 
a person whose properties became forfeited to the king 
for reasons not stated ; when the sabha was called upon 
to remit the amount to the king’s treasury, they had to 
borrow the sum from the local temple and undertake 
to pay the taxes on some temple lands . 84 

The responsibility for the details of local admi- 
nistration was, as pointed out before, 
Local Executive. ves ted in small executive committees 

appointed by the general assembly, 
and service on such committees was honorary. There 
was a small staff of paid servants in each village to 
assist these executive committees and maintain the 
records of the village. These village officials were 
called madhya&thas , a term often rendered into 
‘arbitrators ’; 95 the word does indeed mean ‘arbitra- 
tors’, but it is difficult to admit that this is its meaning 
in the Cola inscriptions, or that the duties of the 
madhyasthas employed by the assemblies included the 
task of arbitrating among disputants. Perhaps the term 

•*105 of 1925. 

•‘BII. Ill, Index s. v. MadhyastKar. 

K — 39 



806 


THE COliAS 


was applied to village officers in order to emphasise 
their neutral position in all matters of rural politics. 
They attended the meetings of the assembly and assisted 
in the conduct of the proceedings, but took no part in 
the deliberations. Their duties and remuneration were 

+* 1 I tf 

fixed by the assembly at its discretion."’ In A.D. 923, 
for instance, the sabfta of Aifijastasam resolved that 
their madhyasthas employed in writing up the accounts 
connected with the tank (eri) were to be remunerated 
at the rate of four measures (nfilis) of paddy per diem, 
and were to receive in addition seven kahniju of ‘red 
gold’ per annum with a pair of cloths each; that each 
of them had, at the end of his year of office, to produce 
accounts and pass through the ordeal of red-hot iron 
(maht) ; that those who were declared pure after 
the ordeal should receive a bonus of a small amount 
of gold, and that those that failed in the ordeal should 
pay a fine of ten kalanjus of gold, the reason for the 
heavy fine being that the corpus of the tank-fund 
(eri-mudal) was not of sufficient size; and that no 
corporal punishment ( sariradandam ) was to be resort- 
ed to by the sabJid in such cases. 90 Generally it was a 
madhyastha that recorded the resolutions of the assem- 
blies to the dictation of one or more of the prominent 
members present and taking part in the preceding 
discussions. Another class of officers was called 

I 

‘ kamnattar’, the exact duties in which each was 
engaged being indicated by phrases like Karai- 
kaluldiukdcandumik-lianakku , 97 the accountant who was 

“226 of J915. 

“30 of 1919. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


307 


supervising the boundaries (of lands'?). In A.D. 1235, 
an accountant was dismissed by a sabha, and his descen- 
dants and relatives declared unfit to hold the office 

i 

again. 88 An inscription of uncertain date from 
]V1 annarkoyil in the Timievelly district mentions the 
madhyastha, the blacksmith, the carpenter, the gold- 
smith and the village-pariali as the persons on whom the 
representatives of the central government depended for 
demarcating the boundaries of a village, Vindanur, 
given away as tiruvidaiydttam .° 9 A curious inscrip- 
tion 1 "" from Tribhuvani (Pondicherry) dated in the 
forty- third regnal year of Kulottunga I, A.D. 1113, 
contains a provision that the artisans and professional 
men should pursue their crafts and professions within 
the precincts of the village, and that such of them as 
served the residents of other villages would be deemed to 
have been guilty of a grave offence against the law. Thi s 
is an interesting example of rural protectionism ; but we 
have no reason to believe that it was universal, or even 
common. On the other hand, the occasions for service 
outside one’s own village or town could not have been 
very frequent. An inscription from Tirumanikuli 
(SA.) records the endowment of a sandivilakku by an 
urp-paraiyan in A.D. 1221. 101 

The functions of the assemblies had a wide range. 

They were as a rule entrusted with the 

** "Ww,-* » **** < " 

F assemMie& 0f direct charge or, at least, the supervision 
• of all charitable endowments in the 


”583 of 1904. 
”400 of 1916. 
‘”205 of 1919. 
*”167 of 1902. 



308 


THE COfiAS 


village. To judge from the number and provenance of 
the inscriptions recording such gifts, in no place was 
this source of public benefaction a negligible item, and 
in several villages it was in itself sufficiently important 
to warrant the creation of a separate committee 
( dharm ewariyqm ) for its administration . 103 Statistics 
are of modem origin, and it is no easy thing to 
venture on quantitative statements relating to a distant 
past; but the student of Cola institutions often wonders 
whether for local well-being, the gifts of the rich did not 
mean more in that period than the taxes levied and 
collected from the residents of a locality by its assembly. 
However that may be, the assemblies were not slow to 


address themselves to the task of enriching local life by 
additions to its amenities, social and cultural. For one 
thing, they took good care to preserve the records of 
older charities and to see that their terms were carried 


out by the parties concerned . 103 Altered economic condi- 
tions sometimes led to a revision of the original terms, 
but a genuine effort was made not to' allow any of the 
numerous perpetual endowments to fall into desuetude. 


- + * - » «. MW.!* 

Most of these centred round the village temple which, 
from somewhat obscure religious origins, had grown by 
the time of the Colas to dominate every aspect of rural 
life all over the country. The role of the temple in the 
secular life of its neighbourhood can hardly be exagge- 
rated, and the temple and its affairs were among the 
chief pre-occupations of the local assemblies ; and the 


temples, and sometimes individual shrines in them, had 


“* 811 . ill, e. 

>♦*199 of 1907; 92 of 1896. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


309 


separate groups who were in charge of their manage- 
ment; fciit these authorities were subject to the double 


control of the local assemblies who exercised a general 
supervision and of the officer of the king who audited 
the accounts. The temple was the centre of all the insti- 
tutions for popular culture and amusement. A detailed 
account of these institutions is given elsewhere. Here 

the part of the village assemblies in their upkeep may be 
briefly noticed. The assemblies often set apart land for 
the maintenance of persons who expounded, in the halls 
of the temples, the national epics of the Ramayapa and 
the Mahabharata, and the purdnas ; such land was 
called Bharatap-pangu (share for Bharata), 1(M and was 
usually made tax-free. Music and dancing, and theatri- 
cal presentations of popular tales and legends, formed 
part of the ordinary routine of the temple, and received 
special attention on festive occasions; and Ndtakasdlds 
were specially constructed for these purposes . 105 There 
were recitations of sacred hymns in Tamil and in 
Sanskrit in the course of the daily worship in the 
temples, and the assemblies sometimes gave shares from 
the common lands of the village for the maintenance of 
these services. Schools of higher lemming were 
attached to temples and so were hospitals. The 
assemblies were found endowing or assisting in the 


endowment of particular subjects like Mimamsa of 
the Prabhakara school , 106 Yedanta , 107 Vyakarana , 108 

4 

IO, 63 of 1897; 48 and 50 of 1923. Pani/u often gives place to put am 
or vrtti. 

'•>199 of 1907; 157 of 190s; 398 of 1921. 152 of 1925; 253, 254 of 1914. 
<••233 of 1911; 333 of 1923. 

>•<276 of 1925. 

>•'18 of 1898; 202 of 1912. 



310 


THE COLAS 


BIuivi§ya > 109 Taittiriya , 110 Vajasaneya , 111 and so on. 
In the foundation of hospitals and the maintenance of 
physicians attached to them the assemblies actively 
assisted and co-operated with the donor . 112 They also 
aided persons who desired to put up rest-houses 
( cmbalam ) and provide for the supply of drinking 
water in them . 113 Agrarian rights and tenures, and 


irrigation of land, of which an account is given else- 
where, were among the most important concerns of the 
assemblies. In addition to the records relating to such 
matters maintained by the central government, the 
villages seem to have kept their own record books 
including a land-register ( nila-mudal ) and a tax- 
register ( pottayam ). 114 The consent of the sabha was 
essential to any alteration in the classification 


of the lands in the village ; the king simulta- 
neously addressed the local adhikdri (official of 

the government) and the sabha concerned , 115 and then 
they met together and put the business through. The 
part of the assemblies in the administration of justice 
has been noticed before. The judicial officers of the 
village ( niydyattdr ) evidently used the proceeds of 
fines levied by them for some common good. In one 
instance, they presented a golden diadem to the god of 
a local temple . 116 


<”•29 of 1898. The name not of the pur&pa but of a sQtra. 811. it. 
p. 524, 1. 118). 

”*33 of 1898. 

•"Ml of 1923. 

“•36 of 1898; 112 and 113 of 1925; 182 of 1915; 97 of 1928. 
il, TA8. i, pp. 168-9; ,260 of 1915; 569 of 1908. 

*“£//. Hi. 150. 

“•188 of 1919. 

“‘221 of 1921. 



LOCAL GOVERNMENT 


311 


The village assemblies sometimes stimulated the 
flow of private charity for the -general benefit of the 
community by giving suitable public recognition to their 
benefactors. The sabhd of Tirupper recorded in an 
inscription, A. D. 1129, their gratitude to a certain 
Bhatta whose prayers and benefactions were believed to 
have been of great use to the village in a troublesome 
period when its fortunes had sunk low and the people 
were deserting it. 117 The sabha of Uttaramerur con- 
ferred some hereditary privileges on a courtesan who 
carried out extensive repairs and additions to the Visnu 
temple in the locality. 118 The sthanattdr of the temple 
and the residents of Tirumalavadi adopted an 
interesting method to express their gratitude to 
a benefactor ; he had greatly improved the temple and 
by slightly diverting the course of the Coleroon, averted 
the danger of inundation which threatened the village ; 
in appreciation of these and other services, the 
sthanattdr petitioned the deity on the occasion of a 
festival that a free house might be granted in per p etuity 
for the residence in the village itself of this great bene- 
factor, and then, ostensibly with the sanction of the 
deity, a house was set apart for the purpose from the 
properties of the temple. 119 This was in 3223. Other 
examples can be easily gathered from the inscriptions. 

. Such in outline were the nature, organisation and 
function of local assemblies and groups in the tenth 
and eleventh centuries. In a general account, many 


”'276 of 1901. See also 211 and 205 of 1928. 
”•172 of 1923. 

”•91 of 1920. 


I 



312 


THE COfcAS 


characteristic details which might add vividness to the 
picture are necessarily left out. No room can be found 
for them except in detailed histories of particular 
assemblies which cannot be attempted here . 120 But 
what has been said is enough to show that between an 
able bureaucracy and the active local assemblies which 
in various ways fostered a live sense of citizenship, there 

4* * f * "* * 

was attained a high standard of administrative 
efficiency and puritjr, perhaps the highest ever attained 
by the Hindu State. 


“•See Studies, It, t. 



CHAPTER XIX 


TAXATION: FINANCE 
{ The economy of the mediaeval state had little in 

common with that of modem govern- 
S Taxauon. f ments, and the Indian State was no 

exception. Taxation was based partly 
on custom, and partly, especially in the case of new 
levies, on the consent, tacit or express, of the groups 
affected. Land was the mainstay of national economy - 
and the land-tax, collected in cash or kind, or as often 
happened in the Cola State by a judicious mixture of 
both methods, was the chief source of revenue. Customs 
and octroi, profession taxes assessed in various ways, 
and the taxation of gifts of nature worked up by man, 
such as the produce of mines, forests and salt-pans, 
were also resorted to. And the ' corvee was exacted 
with more or less regularity. When the cumulative 
effects of these burdens became too oppresive, the 
people abandoned their homesteads and betook them- 
selves elsewhere ; the fear of local depopulation was an 
ever-present check on the rapacity of the tax-collector.) 

The nature of the charges on the public revenues 

depended upon the agency that gathered 
Pl ture. expendl the tax or the due ; for it was not merely 

the king’s government that collected 
revenue in the form of taxes; local bodies and other 
agencies of a communal or professional character also 
raised levies for various purposes. The main charge 

on the revenues of the king was the salaries of officials, 
K— 40 



314 


THE CO^AS 


including the maintenance of the army and the navy ; 
in the higher rungs of public service these salaries took 
the form of assignments of particular revenue items in 
particular areas so that what was paid into the king's 
treasury ( talam ) was a net income that remained after 
deductions on account of such assignments. What 
remained after paying the charges of administration 
was the property of the king and entirely at his disposal. 
A good part of it no doubt went to the maintenance 
of the king’s personal establishment including the 
numerous queens and their retinues. Members of the 
royal family who commanded the special affection of 
the ruling monarch, like Sembiyanmahadevi in Uttama 
Cola’s reign, Kundavai in Rajaraja’s, must have 

received very sumptuous allowances from the king’s 

^ «* ** 

treasury. A great amount of treasure was kept in the 
form of jewels and precious stones which served the 
double purpose of personal distinction for the king and 
a financial reserve for the state. What Abu Zayd notes 
generally of Indian kings in the beginning of the tenth 
century no doubt applied to conditions in the Cola court 
as well : 1 “The Kings of India wear ear-rings of 
precious-stones mounted on gold. They wear round 
the neck collars of great value made of precious stones, 
red (rubies) and green (emeralds), but pearls have the 
greatest value and in most cases they are used. In fact, 
pearls constitute the treasure of the kings and their 
financial reserve . 2 The generals and the high 

*Ferrand — Voyage, p. 138. 

*The TiruvUlangadu plates say that B&jSndra I captured the pearls of 
the P&p^ya King in his Southern expedition. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


315 


functionaries wear equally collars of pearls.” On a 
smaller scale the assignees who were in the enjoyment 
of incomes of varying sizes from the areas assigned to 
them imitated the model set by the king. All of them 
distributed their resources among hoarding, personal 
expenditure, and ‘charity’, which went to meet much 
of what we should now call social expenditure. 

( T1 le language of the inscriptions describing the 

taxes and dues is seldom susceptible of 
Revenue terms. complete or satisfactory interpretation 

at present, and nothing more can be 
done than to offer some tentative inferences from the 
records which will require confirmation or modification 
in the light of further study.) The most general term 
for taxes and dues employed in the epigraphy of the 
period is irai or vari. Two other general terms are 
manru-pdd u and dandam. The former was of the nature 
of judicial fine incurred for specific offences. 3 Dandam 
is a closely related term and often goes with manra- 
pddu; in one instance the former is said to be an instance 
of the latter. 4 But dandam is a term also employed in 
another sense at least in one instance. A dandam of 

9 • 

3,000 kalanju of gold was levied 5 by Parantaka I in his 
38th year, A.D. 945, on the assembly of Tirukkuda- 
mukkil, and the amount was to be paid by them to the 

•Note the use of manta as a verb in this sense. (811. iii, 27, 1. 9). 

*811. iii, 93 — DanQam-ullittu epper-ppatta mantupdftuni (11. 28-30). 
The preceding syllables ‘dnav&y' have been read together with ‘dandam’ by 
Krishna Sastri, who sees a new duty in the phrase '(Lnavaydawlam.* I am 
jncllned to think that 'ftnav&y' means ‘as occasion arises*. (Vol. i, p. 383, 
nTfT Again Krishna Sastri takes manru-]xi$u- to be a duty levied by the 
assembly; if tl^e assembly had a part in its levy and collection, it must 
have exercised its judicial power on such occasions. 

•255 of 1911, 



316 


THE COliAS 


Pandip-padai, perhaps the troops (engaged in the) 
Paijdyan (war). Here the dandam has the appearance 
of a special war-levy, though this is not quite clear. 
The inscription does not give the reason for the levy. 
The amount was very huge in this case, and the 
assembly was still arranging for its payment in the 
third year of Gandaraditya, by selling some lands to 
the local temple. It is also possible that this was a 
heavy punishment brought down on themselves by 
the sabhd in some manner. A record from Alangudi 
states that Yirarajendra levied a special tax of one 
kalauju of gold per veil of land to finance his war 
against Vengi. 0 

Another general term of somewhat uncertain 
import is ‘iravu’, which, in one of the few instances 7 
so far known of it, figures as some sort of a cess paid in 
kind and amounting to a little over 20 per cent of the 
puravu , the land-tax. The word ‘ iravu ’ (begging) 
reminds one of a famous saying in the Rural which 
compares to a highwayman the king addressing a 
request to his subjects (for financial assistance) ; this 
saying in turn recalls Kautilya ’s dicta on pranaya 
(benevolence). 

m ** 

i 

Other general terms in common use were Ay am 

(revenue), Kadamai and Kudimai 
classes of taxes, meaning literally ‘duty’ and ‘ tenancy - 

dues’. ‘Ay am’ had apparently the same 


‘621 of 1920, ARE. 1921, II 35. 
'BlI. ill, 142. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


317 


wide application as ‘ irai ’ and a number of minor dues 

were grouped together under the general description 

of ‘sittmjam’ or ‘sillirai’, both sometimes found 

together in the same inscription . 8 But the most 

significant grouping of the taxes and dues, that which 

provides a key to the whole tax-system, is that contained 

in a phrase like the following from an inscription of 

the twentieth year of Rajaraja I : 9 “Any kind of 

Kudimai due at the Sacred Victorious Gate, the taxation 

( varippddu ) levied by the dr (town or village), and any 

other type of Kudimai .” The same inscription expands 

the last of the three items named into: “irai on those 

•• 

on which irai was due, and eccoru .” 10 The “Sacred 
Victorious Gate ” ( tini-likorra-vdsal ) means no doubt 
the gate of the king’s palace, and the first division of 
the taxes mentioned in this list comprised those levied 
by the king’s government . 11 Then came the dues levied 
by the local assembly, dr, sabhd or nagaram, and these 
were grouped under the name ‘ uridu-varippadn % 
‘taxes levied by the town (or village)’. Lastly, it is 
to be noticed that the term Kudimai was applied to all 
the groups without distinction; thus understood, 
Kudima kbtands for the * duties of the Imdis ’ or 
‘burdens of citizenship’ and is quite close in meaning 
also to ‘kadamaL’ ' After recording the gift of some 

*194 of 1923. 

"121 of 1925. Cf. also 388 or 1913; and 140 of 1926 for similar 
phrases. 147 of 1925 has : ‘peru-vari tilwari tirw-vdialil pOnda kudimai 
epp&rppattadum- See also 149 of 1925. 

10 This Is one of the most difficult terms. Does it mean after all, ‘any 
Kind of meal* or ‘a meal on any account'? It will be remembered that the 
right of some persons to be fed is stipulated for in certain conditions. 

“Sometimes we have only Vd4cUil-p6nda Kudimai for this class as in 
$88 of 1913. cf. K&jadv&ra in 197 of 1923. 



318 


THE COtiAS 


fields as eri-patli (tank-land), the assembly (ur) of 
Nerkunam undertook never to exercise their rights of 
taxation in a manner calculated to abrogate the gift . 13 

The expression Ur-Kil-Iraiyili, tax-free under the ur, 
employed of some lands also implies that such lands 
were exempted from all dues because the residents of 
the village had undertaken to pay these dues in the 
ratio of their holdings in the village . 13 

A general order of Rajaraja I issued by him at 

his capital, Tanjavur, and applicable to 
Central control. the Cola, Tondai and Panclya countries 

shows the extent to which the local 
authorities could rely on themselves for the collection 
of local cesses, and the readiness of the central govern- 
ment to come to their aid, when necessary, in enforcing 
their demands. In certain classes of villages, those 
of the Brahmans, Vaikhanasas and Sramanas, persons 
who held land under the service-tenure ( hani-udaiya ) 
were slack in the payment of dues assessed upon them by 
the village authorities ( uriduvarippadu ). The grounds 


12 #J7. iii, 93. The phrase used is i K / u4imai-&eyyil\ i.e., if (we) levy 
Kugimai. Krishna Sastri translates this into: If we assert our occupancy- 
rights'. It seems to me to be a promise meant to stop, not the encroach- 
ment on, the land itself, but on the income from it which was to be devoted 
to the maintenance of the tank. 

1# 109 of 1911 seems to explain the meaning of Cr-kll r iraiyiU in the 
following: ianilangajukku Qr vijlukk&Huppadi pottagappafli pa^i vanda 
niiam engaj pergajile eyji ijukkak-kadavom agavum ; enga) pakkal vijruk- 
kopflarum gtri-dhanam peflT&rum maj^um peyjru ucjaiyarum ippa<}i 
ipikkak-kadavargaj agavum. 224 of 1917 from Kofukkai, Tanjore district* 
dated 1169, furnishes an example of the eo&M taking 160 kd$m from the 
temple treasury and agreeing to pay the taxes due on half a mlam which, 
after years of neglect, was brought under cultivation to provide for the 
supply of a flower garland every night to the temple; the sabhd agreed 
to continue to pay the taxes on the land irrespective of any changes in 
ownership. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


319 


for the attitude of these tenants are not stated; 
apparently, they held that they were not liable to these 
minor cesses; and there was an attempt at concerted 
action on their part. The dispute became a long-drawn 
affair, and the whole subject went up to the king for 
his decision. The inscription 14 records the royal award 
which went against the tenants and authorised the 
villages to realise the taxes from them as from other 
villagers (urgalilar). Those tenants who, from the 
sixteenth to the twenty-third year of the king’s reign, 
were found to be in arrears for a period of two complete 
years and a third, were declared liable to have their 
lands distrained and sold by the village concerned, and 
the defaulting tenants were forbidden to take any part 
in such proceedings. This award was made by the 
king on the 124th day of the 24th year of his reign- 

The names of the taxes and their nature, so far 

Remissions as known, are generally learnt from the 

numerous records of exemptions 
granted to various institutions from the payment of 
these dues. Although the local assemblies are seen to 
have been responsible for the bulk of such exemptions, 
examples are not wanting of the king granting similar 
exemptions in particular cases. 16 In either case, each 
authority must be understood to have remitted the 
particular dues which it would have been entitled to 
levy in the absence of the remission. This is expressly 
stated in some instances as when the sabha-viniyogam is 

■♦S/I. ill, 9. 

”604 of 1920. 



S20 


THE CO^AS 


said to be remitted on some temple lands which were 
already ur-hll-iraiyili . 1 0 Cases of remission must be 

,l j ■ 

carefully distinguished from those of commutation in 
Which, as has been shown elsewhere, all future dues 

were provided for by the payment of 

Commutation. 1 , . J _ 

a lump sum roughly equal to their value 
capitalised at current rates of interest. Though the 
formula of exemption was similar in either case, there 

'{fr 

was an important difference. When taxes were 
remitted no payment was due from anybody ; when they 
were only commuted, the usual rule was for the 

a* 

assembly of the village, in which the property or the 
institution concerned was situated, to receive the lump 
payment made* to hold itself responsible to the autho- 
rities concerned, including itself, for the payment of 
future dues, and to issue a document to that effect to 
the parties concerned. 17 Such a deed was called 
Irai-Jcaval (lit. tax-guard). 

(The village assemblies were held responsible for 

the land revenue due to the central 
^gaembu'ea. 7 government from the lands in the 

village.) This arrangement was enforced 
right to the end of our period. A record from 
Kalappal 18 (Tanjore Dt.) dated': A. D. 1274 describes 
the sale, by the executive body of the village assembly, 
of land belonging to a certain person who had emigrated 
to the Pandya country and died there without having 
paid the dues on his lands for about ten years. That 

>•526 of 1918. 

>*168 of 1929. 

*•336 of 19 25. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


321 


arrears of revenue were allowed to accumulate for so 
many years gives us incidentally a measure of the 
difference in the method of collection between now and 

i 

then. 

The role of custom in governing assessments 

becomes clear &om the references to 
custom and prece- ane j en ^ time-honoured standards in 

dent. 

particular matters. In an age of active 
municipal life conscious imitation is necessarily one of 
the methods by which the practice of different towns 
tends to become uniform. One of the most conspicuous 
examples of this process in the Cola period is furnished 
by the adoption of the ‘ancient standard of Nandi- 
puram, ’ in the levy of manru-padu in the towns of 
Melappaluvur and Tiruceengodu in the reigns of 
Sundaracola and R&jaraja I . 19 Nandipuram, also 
known as Ayirattali , 20 was a flourishing town in the 
Tanjore District often mentioned in the inscriptions. 
It was in this place apparently that Nandivarman 
Pallavamalla had to stand a si ege by the Tamil princes 
at the beginning of his reign before he was liberated 
by his celebrated general Udayacandra. A verse 
preserved in the commentary on the Vira-soliyam calls 
Sundaracola the king of Nandipuram. 

Besides the regular taxes and dues, occasional 

contributions were also levied for 
S ^ons. contrlbu ‘ particular purposes by local authorities. 

An inscription at Erode, of the year 

>•365 and 367 o 1 1924; BII. lit. 212. 

*•145 of 1928. 



322 


THE COfcAS 


m 


A.D. 922, records that the people of a whole nddu 
undertook to pay some new cess es for providing for 
the worship of Krsna in a Visnu temple at Erode. 
These new cesses were : half-pan am on each household 
( kudt ) ; an eighth (of a panam ) each from either party 
to a marriage; and one manjddi and one hunri of gold 
as due ( pattern- ) from each crematorium, — indeed a 
strange assortment. 21 Again, at Talaieeangadu in 
Tanjore a sum of 100 hasus was raised from the 
professional and religious groups of the locality for 
making certain necessary endowments in the local 
temple in the reign of Rajaraja I. 22 In 1096, the 
people of Kamarasavalli (Trichinopolv district) 
provided for a festival and for certain offerings in the 
temple by requiring the following collections to be made 
and remitted to the temple: one kuruni of paddy per 
md of all the fields growing paddy, millet ( varayu ) or 
gingelly (el) ; one nut from each areea tree and one 
ulakku of oil from the house of every cultivator 
( vellan ). 23 At Tittagudi (South Areot), an image of 
the goddess Bhumidevi was set up about A.T). 1170, and 
the joint assembly of the Cittirameli-periya-nadu and 
the Tisai-ayirattu-ainnurruvar resolved to levy the 
following contributions for the requirements of services 
and offerings to the new deity: one padakku of paddy 
per annum on each plough (er), one kuruni on each' 
labourer (al), five hdsus to be paid by each florist 
(malai katti parimdruvar) , two kdsus by each of the 

**167 of 1910. The record is a late copy of a genuine one. 

”198 of 1925. 



TAXATION : FINANCE 


323 


servants ( pani-makkal ) employed under the two corpo- 
rate bodies assessing the levy, four measures of ghl 
from each family of cowherds in the village. Those who 
went to the villages to collect these dues were to be given 
by each village: half kalam of white rice ( vellai arisi ) 
one kalam of pari rice, fifty areca-nuts, two parra of 
betel leaves, one ndli of salt, one uri of pepper, and 
one measure of gingelly oil; the collectors were also 
authorised to enter into dwellings, distrain metal 
vessels and break mud vessels in the process of collec- 
tion.' 1 One may doubt if these sanctions are to be 
understood literally; they might have been no more 
than an attempt to impress on the people the high 
importance and the urgency of the contributions 
thus levied. Four years later, in 1174, the guild 
of the oil-mongers subject to the Great Guild 
(Managaram) of Kancipuram resolved that each 
oil-mill in the premises of a temple should provide 


for the specified number of lamps and offerings in 
the temple by contribution of the necessary kadamai 
and one old kii-sa per annum, and should observe 


this rule as a caste-ordinance (jdti-dharma) .- 3 In 1232, 


the makes var as attached to the temple and mathas at 


Tirukkannapuram (Tanjore district) resolved to supple- 


ment the dwindling resources of the temple by levying 
contributions, in cash and kind from the servants of the 
temples in specified areas and from those who wore the 
sacred cord ( pantile kuriydya ) ; elaborate arrange- 
ments were also sanctioned for the collection of the 


**21 of 1903. 
“261 of 1909. 



324 


THE CO^AS ' 


dues and for the remuneration of the collectors. 26 The 
perildmaiyar of Sangendi (Trichinopoly district) order 
the collection of paddy from cultivators for meeting the 
requirements of the local temple. 27 In the eleventh 
year of Rajendra III, A.D. 1257, the nagarattdr of 
Kovilur (Tanjore district) made over to the temple of 
Usattanam-udaiyar some of the tolls and other dues, 
usually levied by them viz. the rice they got as mlakkuli 
on their lands, and the pddi-kdval , kai-vdsi and cash 
dues ( kasu-vargam ) on each podi (bag) of rice brought 
into the township. 28 In 1264, an inscription from 
Alangudi records the levy of a voluntary impost by the 
rathakdras on themselves for some purpose that is not 
clear owing to the damaged condition of the record. 20 
Lastly an undated record from Tiruppalanam contains 
a resolution of the nddu, nagaram and padmenvisaiyam 
transferring to the temple certain dues usually collected 
by them from the farmers and the octroi duties on 
pepper, areca-nut, bales of cloth, bags of rice and so 
on. 30 

* 1 

Such instances of local imposts, together with the 

express statement sometimes made that 

Incidence. 

borrowing was resorted to because the 
people were not in a position to bear any additional 
taxation, raise the impression that on the one hand taxa- 
tion in one form and another pressed the people rather 

”637 of 1922. 

1 ’327 of 1928. 

”204 of 1908. 

”4 of 1899. 

,0 187 of 1928. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


325 


hard, and that on the other hand, for most of the extra 
or ad hoc taxation resorted to, the active consent of the 
tax-payer was sought beforehand. 


Sometimes particular dues were ear-marked for 
certain specified purpose such as the payment of interest 

on a perpetual loan given to a sabhd by the local 

’•»« * a t| 

temple. 31 The villages situated on the banks of the 
Kaveri and its branches had sometimes to take 
special measures for keeping the river bund in 
good repair to avert inundation during the floods; 
such villages had to levy a special cess, towards this 
purpose. An inscription of the reign of Kulottunga III 
from Tiruppamburam mentions the Kdverik-karai- 
viniyogam. 3 - 


(Land and houses provided the primary subjects of 
surveying of taxation. An accurate survey of land 

lands - leading to a careful recording of land 

rights in government books appears to have been under- 
taken sometime about the middle of Rajaraja’s reign, 

% 

and from that time, the references to land surveys and 
measurements as recorded in them become more 
noticeable. 33 ) An inscription dated 1184 from Tiru- 
mangalam, 34 Tan j ore district, is of peculiar interest. It 
records that discrepancies had arisen in course of time 
between the record of land rights in the village and their 
actual distribution. The reasons were : first, the natural 
tendency to be remiss in maintaining the records fully 


•»TAS. vi, pp. 11 - 12 . 

”96 of 1911. cf. the term sabh&-viniy6gam. 
”199 of 1917; 59 of 1913; 413 of 1902, etc. 
”113 of 1927. 



326 


THE C0(iA3 


up to date ; second, the encroachments on pathways, 
canal bunds and so on by greedy ryots who 
had surreptitiously extended their holdings ; lastly, the 
,V ikrama- Co lapperaru had altered its course causing 
damage to some fields, and the taxes were still being 
assessed at the old rates without any allowance being 
made for this damage. A new survey was undertaken 
and the results recorded in detail in the inscription 
under reference. The records include the names and 
boundaries of all the shrines in the villages together 
with tlie lands they held. Among the entries made in 
the register, the following are noteworthy: land set 
apart for the sacrifice of goats (hi da) to the pidari; 
kdnis for houses for ambattar and ndvidarf 3 the potter, 
carpenter, black-smith, goldsmith, washerman, and 
pallis come in for free shares. The site whence earth 
was dug out for the river bank, and the burning ground 
are declared niugal. But for the numerous gaps in this 
long inscription, it would be a most satisfactory and 
complete account of the distribution of land in the vil- 
lage at the time of the record. ("Not one 
C 1 Msessment and °* the inscriptions, however, contains 

a definite statement of the proportion of 
the produce that formed the normal share of the state. 

Frequently enough the absolute quantity of paddy or 
other produce collected in the form of particular taxes 
from given units of measure is stated ;(one inscription 30 
of the time of Rajadhiraja I, for instance, records that 

“Both the words now mean ‘barbers’; possibly there was some 
difference between the two classes in the past. 

••103 of 1912. 



TAXATION": FINANCE 


327 


irai paid to a temple on some lands was 28 kalams of 
paddy per veli while on others it was only 19 ;(it is clear 
that the rate of assessment differed with the fertility of 
the soil.) (The classification of land into different grades, 
as many as twelve or more grades ( taram ), 37 and un- 

dassed lands (taramili) being alluded to, also points 
to the same conclusion. But in no single instance do 
we seem to have the data for calculating the precise 
ratio between the tax and the yield.) In the circum- 
stances, any effort to compare the incidence of the 
land-tax under the Colas with that in modem times is 
bound to be unsuccessful. 38 (Vague statements to the 
effect that the king followed the laws of Manu or that 
he collected one-sixth of the produce of the earth as 
the tax due to him 39 can hardly be accepted at their 
face value. The standard rate of 100 kalams per 
veli, which figures in the Tanjore inscriptions of the 
reign of Rhjaraja I as the share of the temple on 
devaddna lands 40 may, on the assumption that the 
fertility of land was then very much what it is now, 
be found to work out at something like a third of the 
gross produce. It is possible that this represents 
the state’s share on these lands made over to the temple ; 
if this conclusion is correct the land tax under the Colas 
would compare not unfavourably with what it was at 
other times and in other parts of India. At the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, Munro calculated 

**343 of 1917, 1. 11; 386 of 1903, dated 1074, mentions the 14th grade 
at Mah&d&napuram. 

**IA. Vol. 40 (1911), pp. 165-8, contains a superficial attempt in this 
direction, 

”$II. iii, 28, 1. 7. 

40 £JI, ii, 4, 5 etc. 



328 


THE CO^iAS 


that in Anantapur the sarkar share was no less than 
45|% of the gross produce from land. 41 ) 

That the revenue from agricultural lands was 
periodically reassessed, and the classification of the land 
revised from time to time in accordance with changes in 
cropping, fertility and so on, is amply borne out by the 
inscriptions. 42 Once more, the regular practice in these 
matters has to be inferred from the exceptions which 
are specially recorded. In some instances the ndttar 
or the sabhd undertake never to raise the land set 
apart for a charity from a lower grade to a higher one 
in any reclassification in future years. In others the 

tax due from specified areas of land is 
meat. fixed m perpetuity as a mlai-irai, a 

permanent settlement. In the fifteenth 
year of a Parakesari, at the instance of Kandan- 
Maravan, a Cola feudatory, the 'ndttdr of Kunrak- 
kurram assigned some land to a public servant as his 
janma-bhumi (same as jivita ?), and ordered that he 
was to pay on the land a fixed tax ( nilai-irai ) of 25 
lzalanjus of gold of the treasury standard of fineness 
(tala-ccemmai) , 43 From the Tiruvalangadu plates, it is 
seen that Rajendra I fixed in perpetuity 44 the dues to be 
paid to the temple of Mahadeva every year by the 
devadana village of Palaiyanur. 

41 Letter to the Private Secretary to the Governor, dated Anantapur, 
20th June 1806. I owe this reference to Dr. K. N. V. Sastri. See also 
Moreland, India at the death of Akbar , p. 98. 

4 *3 of 1899 is a very interesting, though fragmentary, record giving a 
vivid idea of the process of resettlement and the accuracy of the land- 
revenue registers of the time. 

«»356 of 1924. 

“Ninxiraiyfty# L 76. 



TAXATION : FINANCE 


329 


A brief review of some typical inscriptions 
. A will convey a general idea of the 

Names of taxes. * ° 

nature and number of taxes, cesses and 
other dues. Though their name is legion, most of them 
were not general, but occasional arid 'restricted in their 
incidence. In A.D. 944 the sabhd of Ukkal resolved 
that their executive committees 45 were to abstain from 
exacting Vetti (forced labour), Vedilai and Vidak- 
kdnam from the tenants settled in Sodiyambakk am , a 
hamlet assigned to a Visnu temple in the locality; the 
temple was moreover granted the right to levy and 
exact fines ( manru-pddit ) from the peasants of the 
village for their faults and sins (kitrran-dosam) . 40 The 
Madras Museum Plates of Ut.tama Cola record that the 
older inhabitants of Solaniyamam in Kancipuram, an 
area belonging to the temple, were excused the 
payment of all ancient dues ; 47 those residents, 
however, who had come from other towns and 
villages and had settled in it, were required to 
contribute as irai to the god of Uragam a quarter 
measure of oil and two n til is of rice per household per 
month; even they were exempt from any other dues 

levied by the nagaram. The kol-nirai-kdli and kdl-alavu- 
kuli of Kancipuram which wei*e assigned as income to 
the temple of Uragam are explained in the Sanskrit 
portion of the Museum plates as tolls on articles mea- 
sured by weight and by capacity. 48 That this was a very 

4 'The committees named are: samvatsara, eri and toftam. 

«• SII . Hi, 12. 

4 *11. 89-94. The expression Purva-marjjddi4xai recalls purvdc&ram of 
the Uttaram£rQr inscriptions. 

« 11. 4, 15-6. 

K— 42 



330 


THE COJAS 


small toll is seen from the rate of half-nali per kalarn 
recorded in an inscription from Tiruvamattur of the 
time of Rajaraja I; 49 in this place this kuli was given 
to the pallis of the village who measured the paddy due 
to the temple from its tenants till about A.I). 1010, when 
as a result of an enquiry into the affairs of the temple, 
this kuli was transferred to the uvaccar as remuneration 
for their services in the temple, including the cost of 
clothes to be supplied to a mani (a brahmacarin) who 
officiated at the srl-bali ceremony. Examples of general 
taxes falling upon the residents of Tiruvallam in the 

fourth year of Rajendra I are stated to be : the price 
of water from wells and tanks and the gold of joyous 
persons. The latter ( ugappdr pon ) seems to be a 
small payment made by householders on auspicious 
occasions like marriages. 50 In the sixth year of 
Rajendra I, the Tiruvalangadu plates record a 
formidable list of pariharas made over to the temple; 
all these pariharas, — the list is a long one and yet said 
to be not exhaustive, 51 — were thenceforth to be collected 
by the temple and not by the king. -- Some years later, 
in A.D. 1021, the sabhd of Vembarrur received sixtv- 

✓ •• •• V 

five kdsus r ' 2 from the Siva temple of SrI-Kudittittai, 

*•16 of 1922. 

**811. iii, 54. The text is : “ M§*nirum kipayum nlr-kkly vilalyum 
ugappar ponnum.” Hultzsch translates this into: “the high level water, 
the wells, the price paid for water, the gold of ugappdr** Menlr in con* 

trast with kiiwxu (well) seems to imply “a receptacle of water from above*', 
a tank. The wiole of the first phrase, therefore, may be understood as 
above. 

**811. iii, pp. 410-11, 11. 436-442. Krishna Sastri gives tentative 
renderings of some of these in his translation (pp. 436-37). 

**292 of 1308. 



TAXATION : FINANCE 


331 


and in lieu of interest thereon, they agreed to forgo 
the following dues from some temple lands; the 
siddhaya-kasu, the paiicavara-paddy, gram and dlioll, 
oil and ghl and other vari levied by the town 
(uriduvari), the payment for the tank ( eri-ivu ) and 
the forced labour ( vedanai ) on banks and bunds 
( hulai and kurambu) and other smaller dues ( silvari ). 
An inscription of Udaiyar Sundara Cola-Pandya from 
Tiruvalisvaram 33 states that five veils of land were 
converted from Brahmadeya into ryotwari land 
( velldn-vagai ) and required thereafter to pay as land- 
tax ( iraik-kadan ) paddy to the amount of 642 kalams, 
6 kurunis , and 2f nails, and 2\ sevidus as measured by 
the ndrdyam equal to five nulls; besides 35£ and 3180 
kdsus as iiruvu kol-nilan-kusa and 5 kdsus as kdtci- 


erudu-kdsu. Among money-dues (ayam) to be collected 
from some lands in Kilur were : maramanjadi, patli- 
kaval, vendu-kdl, manaik-katci-pperu, kuraik-kasu, 
kidak-kasu and others ; only these dyams, and no other 
kind of dues, were to be levied from the lands (older 
devadanas excepted) set apart by two Malaiyaman 
chieftains for certain expenses in the temple at 
Tirukkoyilur. 54 Of these cesses mara-manjddi seems to 
have been the levy of one man jddi of gold on each useful 
tree ; pddi-kd val was no doubt a payment on account of 
the village watchman’s fee, and kidak-kasu, a small cess 
on each head of male cattle ; the nature of the other dues 
is not easily understood. An important record of the 
reign .of Rajadhiraja I from TribhuvanP gives the 


••327 of 1916. 
•*^62 Of 1902. 


V\4 L 



332 


THE CO^AS 


information 55 tliat the annual share of the landlord on 
72 velis of land was 12,000 A alams of paddy, giving an 
average of 166 and f A -alams per veil; and that after 
remitting this amount of paddy, the tenants cultivating 
these lands were to be held liable only for eri-ayam, 

■jfcrV *^ «****%-■ 

padi-kiival-kuli, free labour (amaiiji) on the tank, and 
not for any other customary dues (marijadi) of the 
piddyai (section of village) such as vellan-irai, 
ulavirai, al and amaiiji. In the second year of 
Yirarajendra 50 the proceeds from the following taxes 
in several villages named belonging to three nadus 
were made over to the temple of Tiruvenkadu 
towards the expenses on festivals and offerings on the 
king’s birthdays: all kll-iraip-pattain (smaller taxes) 
including urk-kalanju, kutnara-kaecfinam, mlnpattam, 
arrup-pattam and tattarp-pattam ; tarip-pudavai, 
dasa-vandain, velik-kasu, sevakak-kasu, valangai- 
idangai-mahanmai, tinga]-m6ham, and ten has its per 
head on account of the pauruai and panda-vetti (free 
supplies '?) dues from these villages. Another record of 
the same reign dated three years later gives a very 
similar list of taxes and dues from places in the 
Chingleput district made over to the temple of Accara- 
pakain for a like purpose. 57 In this list the term 
antamyam is applied to a number of taxes collected by 
the sabha including iraiyiiik-ka.su, panmai, panda-vetti, 
ugavaipon, kaval-sevagam and so on; and others fall 
under the heads of kudimai and kadamai, though the 


••176 of 1919. 
**113 of 1896. 
"263 of 1901. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


333 


principle of grouping is by no means easy to infer from 
the names of the taxes themselves. 


In 1100 A.D., the dues remitted on some devaddna 
lands at Colapuram (South Travancore) included 
mudaik-kuli and dasavandam among the pdttams, and 
antardyam and sil-kudimai . 5K An inscription from 
Tenneri ( Chingleput) , dated 1116, exempts the people 

residing on some lands from the payment of vdsal- 
tiramam (door-tax) and the provision of manai-yirai- 

sorii and vetti-muttai-ydl (free food and labour on 
specified occasions) ; the mahdsabhd undertake them- 
selves to pay nlrvil a i-an tardy am and all siUirai on the 


same land/’ 0 Again, a record of 1123 from Tindivanam 
mentions that for capitalising the dues on a plot of land 
worth 20 has us, a donor had to pay down 100 kdsus, 
from the interest on which were to be met dues described 
as follows : scmnr-amaiiji t i rnveluccik-kudimai pern- 


vari sillirai eccorti vctti muttaiydl koyil vdsalil pdiida 


kudimai cpperppattad u m . 59 “ The same record also gives 
the following as due from the nattakkollai, residential 
part, of the village: uppukkdsu senmr-amanji tiru~ 
reluccik-kudimai eccoru kurrunellu epperppattana. 
The sabhd of Madhurantakam sell some land from' the 
gdpracdrabliumi , grazing - common, of the township, and 
in doing so, they state that they forgo the kadamai due 
on. areca-t rees growing on the land then sold, and in fact, 
all other taxes ( vari ) including the manai-irai (house 
tax) on the houses built upon it. 60 The names of other 


“31 of 1896. 

“224 of 1922. 
“•206 of 1902. 

“128 Of 1896. 



334 


THE CO^iAS 


dues mentioned in the inscriptions of the reign of 

Raj arii j a III are: mup-padakka, kanban i, tari-irai in 

the tirmnadai-vildgam (temple premises), m-aganmai 

from carpenters and smiths and potters, poll tax (per- 

vari ) on rani gar (oil mongers), and the kadamai on 

oil-mills — mentioned in a record of the thirteenth year 

from Munnur, South Arcot ; 01 tanigdt-peru and kangdni 

md-ncllu in a record of the fifteenth year from 

Vayalur ; 62 kdrttigai-arm, kurttigai-paccai and other 

cash dues ( kmdyam ), kadai-irai (shop-tax) and 

djivakak-kdsn, evidently a tax on djirakas — mentioned 

in an inscription of the twenty-second year from 

Po} T gai near Virincipuram f 3 kanakka-vari, edultuk- 

kotfi , arimnkkai — three dues collected in the form of 

paddy, and veitip-pudavai, mudar-riramam, vagainda- 

kCtsu, pattolaik-kdsu, iniilladisinnam, velip-payaru, 

tdppadi-arm, acca-tari, saligait-tari, tmagat-lari, 

parait-tari — all apparently small cash dues (kdsu- 

kadamai) mentioned in a record 04 of the twenty -eighth 

year from the same place, with the addition ‘and other 

dues in cash and kind’ ; and lastly pattit-i endow, 

mdvadai, maravadai in a record of the thirtieth year 

from Tiruvannamalai . 03 Most of these terms are still 

• • 

obscure; but they give an idea of the extent of local 
variations and the senseless multiplication of very minor 
dues in the tax system, and almost seem to suggest that 


"‘57 of 1919. 

•’421 of 1922. 

i, 59. The phrase &4uviQal-pdr&ir’kCi$ii occurs in 199 of 1912, a 
very interesting record. 

•*8IL i, 64. 

“495 of 1902. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


335 


the number of dues was increasing with the weakness 
and ineffectiveness of the central government. There 
can be no doubt that, judged by any standard, the 
system especially in the later period was complex, 
confused, vexatious in the extreme and, most probably, 
relatively unproductive. 

An inscription 60 of Adhirajendra states that the 
minor dues from the <1 eraddna villages of the 
Tiruvallam temple detailed under the heads kUiraip- 
jxlttam and antarayam, were collected at the consoli- 
dated rate of 25 kfmis per 3000 kaJams. But what are 
these 1000 k alums'} Do they represent gross produce, 
or the temple’s share of it l On the former assumption, 
the minor taxes would constitute a substantial addition 
to the burden laid on land. As the same inscription 
states that one kdsu was equal to four kalams of paddy, 
the surcharge on account of the minor taxes comes to 
10%. If this is a rate calculated on the gross produce, 
and if the incidence of land revenue calculated above 
may be presumed to have continued to hold in this reign 
as well, cultivators had to give up in one way and 
another something well over 40% of the gross produce; 
a rate that does not compare unfavourably with what 
we know of the land tax under the Yijayanagar or the 
Moghul rulers. 

The term pfidi-karal occurring more than once in 

the lists of taxes and dues deserves more 

Pacji-k&val. 

attention than most of the other items 
mentioned ; for it refers to a universally prevalent 


••811. Ui, 57. 11. 8 it. 



336 


THE Cd^AS 


system of safeguarding property from theft, especially 
at night. This was the system by which each village 
maintained its own kdval-kuran who, in return for 
certain regular payments to him, held himself 
responsible for the security of property in the village 
to the extent of either recovering lost property or 
making it good; this system survived in some measure 
almost till the other day in the Tamil country, 
and it seems to have been indeed of very ancient 
origin. A special staff of officials entrusted with this 
duty, and maintained from the proceeds of a special 
cess ear-marked for the purpose, the padi-kuval-kfili as 
it is sometimes called, formed a regular feature of the 
Cola administrative system. In the later Cola days, we 

• «/ * I / 

find these duties increasingly falling into the hands of 
the over-grown vassals whose rise was a symptom of the 
imminent dissolution of the empire. Humbler men in 
charge of relatively restricted areas also carried on their 
work more quietly and with less detriment to the well- 
being of the central administration. An inscription 
from Talaiccangadu (Tanjore district) dated A. D. 1221 
states that the pddi-kdppdr were provided with 
residences in the villages in addition to some 
allowances as their wages. 07 Examples of the other 
type are quite numerous ; often an individual is found in 
possession of the pddi-kdval-kdni of a whole nudu, if not 
of a wider area, and such an individual often gave 
expression to his vanity or piety by remitting the fee 
due from sacred property belonging to temples, or 
requiring the temple authorities to burn lights or 

91 207 of 1925, muxk&valufyaiya p&$i-k&ppdr. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


337 


conduct festivals in the manner specified by him instead 
of paying the fee. The Vanakovaraiyas, Malaiyamans, 
Muttaraiyas, Sambuvarayas and Kadavarayas all fur- 
nish instances of the practice sketched above . 68 The 
terms perumbadi-kdval 69 and mer-pddi-kdvaV 0 are some- 
times employed, and these are perhaps meant to indicate 
the wider sphere of their police duties, or their higher 

status as compared to the ordinary padi-kaval of the 
villages. 

The term iraiyili (tax-free) so often met with in the 

epigraphy of the period does not appear 
to have always meant absolute immunity 
from all taxes and dues. The nature and extent of the 
immunity granted was apparently defined in each 
individual case, the use of the term in respect of any 
land simply meaning that there were some such immuni- 
ties to be taken account of in the particular case. This 
is seen not only from' the mention in some inscriptions 
of an impost called iraiyili-kdsu, meaning perhaps kasu 
due from iraiyili-lands, 70 * but from an explicit record 
of the time of Rajaraja I from Tiruppanmalai in the 
North Arcot District . 71 From this it becomes clear that 

”243 of 1929; 177 of 1906; 16 of 1903 ; 244 of 1901 etc. 

“157 of 1902. 

,0 502 of 1904. The term occurs in 199 of 1912 and 

421 of 1922. 

T ®»168 of 1923 from Uttaramerflr states that on some lands no 
Izaiyilik-k&Su, would be collected for the current year and five kd$us 
would be collected under this head for every subsequent year. 

T *19 of 1890. EL iv, pp. 137-140. Venkayya seems to me to miss the 
point that the temple paid certain taxes on its izaiyili lands before, and 
was freed from them in the manner recorded in this inscription. 

K— 43 



338 


the c5^as 


the village Kurakam-padi was an iraiyili-pallic-ccmdam 
in the enjoyment ( bhogam ) of the Jaina temple in 
Tiruppanmalai. The Ilada chieftains ruling in the area 
before the eighth year of Rajaraja, the date of the 
inscription, levied the karpiiravilai from the temple, 
and as a result the temple did not have enough for its 
expenses; 72 the wife of the Ilada chieftain Vira Sola 
drew his attention to this fact when they went together 


i*- 

to worship in the temple, and he agreed thenceforth to 
cease collecting the karpu-rarvilai, and another cess, 
called cmn i yd y a y7 vn-dn n da-ira i, of which the exact 
nature is by no means certain. 73 An inscription of the 
reign of Rajariija III from Tirukkadaiyiir 74 furnishes 
evidence that even iraiyili lands had to make periodical 
payments of lump sums on a lower scale than usual for 
the renewal of their iraiyili status — iraiyili varisaip- 
padi-irai -vmdar-kasu tan da kkadavadCma- padi-tavira. 
The lands dealt with in this record are described as 
kasu kolla. ur-kil-iraiyili. 


Again, as noticed already, the term! vr-kil- 
iraiyili suggests that the ur made itself respon- 
sible for the dues thereon ; another possibility is 
that the land so described was free from the 
payment of local taxes, but had to contribute to the 
central revenues like any other land. 


72 The text is: ittarmam-kettupp&giradu. 

**Venkayya suggests two meanings: tax on unauthorised looms or 
on quivers (ibid). 

fi 245 of 1925. This is treated as an exemption from if?ai-kdvcU in 
ARE. 1925, App. B. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


339 


The Tanjore inscriptions of the reign of Rajaraja I 

make it clear that in each village some 
Non-taxabie land, land was absolutely exempt from all 

taxes and imposts. Such lands included 
the sites occupied by the ur-nattam (i.e. the residential 
part of the village), the temples, tanks, the channels 
passing through the village, the paraicceri (the hamlet 
of the pariahs), the kammanacceri (the artisans’ 
quarters) and the burning ground (sudu-kadu) The 
total extent of such areas is stated and subtracted from 
the gioss area of the village in order to ascertain the net 
area of taxable land. The existence of different grades 
of iraiyili lands with varying degrees of immunity 
enjoyed by them is thus clearly established. 

A late Cola inscription from Tiruvorriyur, 70 dated 
A.D. 1223, records the fact that some lands which were 
treated as irangal were, on enquiry, found to be only 
nlngal and that, consequently, they had to pay into the 
treasury of the temple a considerable number of taxes 
and dues which had so far not been collected. It is clear 
that the term irangal means exemption (from taxes) 
while ningal implies only that the taxes were removed 
from the state revenue registers because they had been 
transferred to some other agency for its own use. 77 
Again, some cultivable land which was lying unclaimed 

7 *SII. ii, 4, para 1. Among the boundaries of some land in Tiruvep- 
kaflu we find ‘the path along which corpses are taken’. (502 of 1018). 

’•199 of 1912. This record mentions a tax (u$amai) on dyers (Hvap* 
puttOyppdr ) . It names several taxes and dues and shows that these 
varied according to the crops raised. It also mentions ari$i-k&6u on salt 
pans. 

"Sewell, H1SI„ p. 136, n. 3. 



340 


THE COI.AS 


( parrili ) was assigned in 1233 by the sabhd of Talaic- 
cangadu as iraiyili devadana to three Siva temples of 
the locality; the gift contained the provision that if the 
land was not entered as iraiyili in the olugu and 
pottagam, title-deed and register, but only as tirappu, 
open (to assessment), the irai on the land was to be 
borne by the inhabitants of the village. 78 Evidently the 
record was engraved when the status of the land had not 
been finally decided; the assembly had evidently taken 
steps to secure iraiyili status for the land from the 
central government ; but they also provided against the 
contingency of their efforts proving unsuccessful. 
Records like this give us a casual glimpse of the 
relations between local and central authorities. 


(.To estimate the incidence of so complex a system of 

taxes and dues, central and local, 
tax system. compulsory and optional, modified by 

partial and total remissions of various 
types would always be a difficult task ; and in the actual 
state of our evidence, utterly impossible. The pressure 
of taxation in different localities must have varied 


with the number and rates of the local cesses added by 
local authorities to the tax system imposed by the 
central government which may be presumed to have 

**^(#«*» ** <r» '*'■ 

been more or less uniform as between different 


provinces. Then, the wide-spread practice of assign- 
ing revenues to members of the official nobility, 
to feudatory chieftains, to temples and so on, introduced 
a new factor; not all of these agencies could have 


'•206 of 1925, 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


341 


adopted equally rigorous methods of exacting their dues. 
An appeal to the centre against local excesses, and in 
the last resort, migration from the locality when it was 
possible were the only remedies open; and it is hard 
to believe that the utmost vigilance even of an efficient 
bureaucracy could have done much to ensure a 

uniformity of practice among such 

of fo y« 

collection. diverse agencies of tax-collection. 

Instances are not altogether lacking of 
oppressive methods adopted in the process of collecting 
taxes and other dues; the sabhd of brahmadeyam 
Mahendramangalam have left on record 79 the fact that 
in A.D. 1001 the military ( padmyilar ) subjected them 
to such suffering {vedanai) putting them in water and 
standing them in the sun, that, unable to bear the 
treatment, they proceeded to Tanjavur with an escort 
to lay the matter before Rajaraja-Maharaja ; and that 
the king remitted the matter again to local officers. 
Supporting the man on the spot is evidently not so 
modem a device in administration as we are apt to 
think; though incomplete, the inscription seems to 
record the enforcement of the original order without 
any modification being effected. In the village of 
Jambai, an officer demanded some tax from a woman 
in the third year of Rajendra II; 80 when she denied 
her liability the officer did something 81 which forced 

9 *159 of 1895. In this case the sabhd appears to hav<> suffered for the 
default of an accountant who had a kdni in the village. 

“80 of 1906. 

“The officer’s action on her denying that she was liable to pay the tax 
is expressed in the words: avajai koccai-vikka. ARE. 1907 II, 42 suggests 
that this means he put her through an ordeal. 'Koccai* means %ivu f f humi- 
liation. 



342 


THE COJjAS 


her to commit suicide by taking poison. The officer 
had to expiate the crime by endowing a lamp of 
32 kdsus.) 

/While thus, in the early period of imperial Cola 
rule, the rigour of collection occasionally tended to 
become oppressive in character, the people were exposed, 
in later times, to another danger. This arose 
from the increasing autonomy of local chieftains who 
were no longer restrained by a powerful central govern- 

«•»*» i * 

ment and often resorted to oppressive fiscal 
An inscription from Tiruvorriyur, 8 - dated A.D. 12X3, 
records in detail a painful episode, possibly typical of 
several unrecorded occurrences of the period. A 
Yadavaraya chieftain either imposed a new tax or 
revised the assessment under an old head of revenue — 
the name of the tax involved is pan-van — and levied 
a rate of one-fourth mddai on each veil of arable land ; 
he did not allow the usual exemptions in favour of 
deserted or decadent townships, but insisted on all the 
villages and townships of the nddu, whatever their 
condition, paying the full measure of the dues. The 
tax-gatherer appointed by the Yadavaraya came round 
to Punnaivayil; and after collecting as much of the tax 
as he could, he caught hold of the members of the local 
sab ha and bound and imprisoned them;; the members 
of the sabhd thereupon proceeded to sell away 80 velis 
of the cultivable land of the village together with part 
of its residential area for a sum of two hundred palan- 
gasus in order to meet the balance of the oppressive 



*’202 of Ml 2. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


843 


impost. It is significant that the man who bought the 
land at once transferred it to the temple of 
Tiruvorriyur, ear-marking it for certain specified pur- 
poses, religious and educational; this was obviously 
because of a sentimental dislike to use for one’s own 
private benefit property acquired under such distress- 
ing conditions. Virtually, therefore, it comes to this: 
that a generous nobleman came to the rescue of the 
oppressed sabha, and saw to it that though the village 
became distinctly poorer on account of the new 
i mpo st, the loss it sustained was just made 
tolerable to it, as it led to a definite increase 
in the social amenities available in the neighbour- 
hood. In the years 1238 and 1239, we have records 83 
from Mannargudi, in the heart of the Tanjore 
district, stating in unmistakable terms the oppres- 
sive and vexatious nature of the imposts levied on the 
people bv all and sundry authorities and the consequent 
resolution taken by them to abandon all cultivation until 
conditions improved. The language employed is very 
clear and furnishes an eloquent testimony to the internal 
condition of the Coja kingdom in its decay: palarum kai 
vandapadi tandik-kolgaiyale engalukkat-taripparudi- 
ydle, ‘as it has become difficult for us to sustain ourselves 
on account of the arbitrary imposts exacted by several 
(persons).’ These complaints from the people were 
heard by the sabha, of Mannargudi met together with 
the assemblies of five adjacent nddus, and the meeting 
resolved to authorise the people to pay only the legiti- 
mate dues that were then recorded in detail and to resist 


”96. 98, 104 of 1897. 



344 


THK COLAS 


all other demands in excess of the standard laid down 
by that meeting. It should be noted, however, that con- 
sidering the extent of space and time covered by these 
inscriptions, the instances of the employment of such 
oppressive methods are remarkably few indeed. It 
should also be noted that protests against unusual levies 
and successful attempts on the part of the people to 
resist them by codifying the standard of normal fiscal 
practice are not unknown. An inscription 8 * of the 
third year of Kulottunga I from the Mysore territory 
is very interesting in this connection. The inscription 
is a record of the periya-visaiyam, the Great 
Assemblage. It opens by saying that since the race of 
Cola rulers began, no tax had been laid on cows and 
she-buffaloes in all the territory comprising the 78 nodus 
of N igarili-sola-mandala, the 48,000 piimi of Jayan- 
gonda-sola-mandalam, the Raj endrasolap-padinen- 
pumi assigned to the "V alangai-mahasenai of the Great 
Army, and that consequently, the new levy on cows and 
she-buffaloes introduced by Adigarigal Sola-muvenda- 
velar need not be paid. Again the government share 
(melvurom) was specified as one-fifth of the produce of 
forest tracts and dry crop lands, and one-third of that 
of rice lands under a tank. Further, the rate of tax on 
the cultivation of hill-tracts by hill-tribes (vedar) was 
to be one cloth ( puduvo/i ) for 1500 kulis / the record also 
laid down the rates for all other miscellaneous dues and 
services, and concluded by specifying the length of the 
measuring rod to be employed in land measurements. 


><464 of 1911=^0. x. Mb. 49 (a) ; see p, xxvlll — ibid. 



TAXATION : FINANCE 


345 


We have not many recorded instances of such popular 
attempts to fix the scale of customary taxes and dues to 
government ; and such attempts might not have always 
restrained a self-willed and autocratic ruler or 
chieftain; but that they were made, and that in the 
popular consciousness there was a clear limit to the 
taxing power of government — these are facts of some 
significance and must be noted in any account of Cola 
polity. 

The methods of collection, however, clearly included 
distraint and sale of land for arrears in payment ; such 
sales were public in character and called after the king 
in whose reign they took place. In a Rajendrap- 
peruvilai, for instance, the assembly of Arm j igai- 
caturvedimangalam' came by some land, as the three sons 
of Narayana-kramavittan had migrated elsewhere and 
not paid the dues on the land for a period of about 
fifteen years . 85 Rajaraja’s order against the Kani- 
Udaiyar (service-tenants) of particular classes of 
villages in the Cola, Pandya and Tondai countries 
which has been discussed above, also sanctions confisca- 
tion and sale of land for arrears of ur-idu-va rippdd u . 

The Hr of Tirukkaeeui* (Chingleput district) 
suffered from a failure of harvest, and finding it 
difficult to pay the taxes, they resorted to raising a loan 
from a nobleman in the neighbourhood; they did not 
repay the sum, perhaps they could not, but allowed hiir 
to bring under cultivation some of the waste lane 
belonging to the village, and then, in lieu of the interest 
on the loan they undertook to pay the taxes on the lane 

”189 of 1914. 

K— 44 



346 


THE COJiAS 


newly brought under the plough. 86 A similar instance 
of crop-failure due to scarcity of water in a village in 
the Tan j ore district is met by a reduction of the area 
under wet crop from A.D. 1160, the local temple being 
required to convert some land into a betel garden 
so as to relieve the pressure on the. water-resources 
of the village; 87 the temple also advanced some money, 
and got the land in question declared a kasit-kolla- 
iraiyili. 

Instances are by no means wanting, from the later 
Co]a period, of land tax being realised, in the last resold, 
by the sale of the defaulters’ lands. Some Bralunin 
tenants of Vanavanmadevi-caturvedimangalam (Tiruc- 
cirai) in the Tan j ore district, unable to pay the taxes, 
had abandoned their lands and left the village, and 
these lands were sold to a neighbouring temple in 
1117 ; 88 it is not clear whether the inability of the 
deserters to pay the taxes was due to heavy assessment 
or irregular collection resulting in an accumulation of 
heavy arrears; the sabha of the village conducted the 
sale, and this favours the later assumption. Two years 
later, a very similar instance of desertion and sale is 
recorded in Konerirajapuram, also in the Tanjore 
district; 89 in this case, it was clearly the tenants who 
deliberately defaulted; there was no accumulation of 
arrears, for only the taxes of the forty-ninth regnal 
year, the year of the record, were involved; and the 
village assembly was required by a letter from the 

‘•274 Of 1909. 

•’191 of 1925. 

*•620 of 1909. 

”647 of 1909. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


347 


revenue officers of the king to sell the lands and realise 
the tax dues. It looks as if an attempt was made to 
enforce more regular collections. 

In the fifth year of Vikramacola, the mahdsabhd of 
Karikala-eoja-caturvedimangalam resolved to fulfil 
their responsibilities in regard to land-revenue due 
from persons who were unable to pay the taxes and from 
those who had emigrated elsewhere, by selling their 
lands in sabhai-vilai, public sale by order of the sabhd, 
or by making them iraiyili devaddnas and, of course, 
getting the money equivalent from the temple 
treasury. 00 

An inscription of Vikramacola ’s reign from 
Uttattur, (Trieliinopoly district) is interesting in many 
ways. 91 It records that a person, in possession of a 
hCtni (landed estate) which he had bought, was unable to 
meet the tax dues thereon: the sabhd of Srikantha- 

' t • 

caturvedimangalam, where his land was situated, took 
the matter up. Meanwhile, he was found guilty of a^ 
minor offence in the temple and sentenced to a fine of 
20 Jcdsus. His lands were sold, and the taxes and fine 
realised from the proceeds. These incidents seem to be 
recalled several years later in an inscription from the 
same place, 82 dated 1199, which states that the land had 

'°4 of 1914. 

•'512 of 1912. 

• 2 490 of 1912. It should be noted, however, that there is a discrepancy 
between the Hru. aparddam of the earlier inscription and the Theft of 
jewels of the later record; one wonders if that could be called a minor 
offence. Again, the earlier record mentions only a fine of 20 kCUus for the 
offence in the temple, and says nothing about the confiscation of the house 
and servants. It may be that the same person committed a second offence 
and lost the house and servants in consequence, these being all that were 
left to him after his lands had been sold on the prior occasion. 



348 


THE CO^iAS 


originally been held by a Brahmin who, having stolen 
the jewels of the goddess, was compelled to give it up 
along with his house in the nattam and his slaves 
(nai tamanaiyum adimaiymn ) as devadana. 

Even a temple had occasionally to sell its land to be 
able to meet the revenue dues on its estates ; an instance 
of this is recorded in Saluvankuppam near Mamalla- 
puram, about A.D. 1215. 03 On the other hand, the 
temples collected the dues owing to them from' their 
tenants by distraining and, if necessary, selling their 
possessions with the king’s sanction. 94 

No account of the financial aspect of Cola admini- 
stration can be complete which omits to 
ture . lay stress on the extent to which the 

excesses to which the system was liable 
corrected themselves more or less automatically by the 
social uses to which wealth was put. Hoarding was by 
no means unknown, especially on the part of kings and 
temples ; but there was much spending also, and in the 
conditions of mediaeval life the opportunities for extra- 
vagant and wasteful expenditure of an anti-social 
character w’ere much few r er than at the present day. No 
great gulf separated the personal habits of the rich 
magnate and his poorer neighbours. The rich had to 
seek distinction by competing in the service of the gods 
and of the poor. To build a temple or endow a motha, 
to attach a school or a hospital to either, to reclaim 

*•57 of 1890. 

•‘264 Of 1911. 



TAXATION: FINANCE 


349 


land and to promote irrigation, — such were tlie most 
common roads to social eminence and public recognition. 
The temples which by their hoards tempted the cupidity 
of the foreign invader at a later day, were, at this 
period, the mainstay of the people and their refuge in 
times of physical and financial distress. They consti- 
tuted a sort of reserve bank with branches in every 
village which absorbed and retained the surplus wealth 
of the community in normal times, and released it for 
use in seasons of financial stringency, and was ever 
ready to help the community to turn a sharp comer. 
A destructive flood, or prolonged drought might 
have wrought far more permanent damage to the 
economy of a locality if it were not for the assistance 
its people derived from the resources of the temple 
accumulated by the piety and industry of generations 
of their ancestors. Tlie 'king, the nobles and the temples 
drew largely in various ways upon the products of the 
industry of the common people ; but much of this wealth 
was returned to them in ways that greatly advanced 
their common good. It was a wonderful social harmony 
based, not on equality of classes or individuals, but on a 

readiness to give and take, a mutual good will that had 
its roots deep down at the foundations of communal 
life. 



CHAPTER XX 


POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : 
STANDARD OF LIFE 

/ 

(.Caste was the basis of social organisation and many 

examples of caste organisations have 
society. been incidentally passed under review m 

the course of our studv of social and 
economic life. Each caste was more or less a hereditary 
occupational group with an active organisation for the 
regulation and protection of its economic and social 
interests; and the Indian society of those days is best 
conceived as a loose federation of strong self-regulating 
groups which shared a common background of social 
rights and obligations which made for mutual under- 
standing and accommodation. ' There is practically no 

i - 1 

evidence of ugly social conflicts and jealousies such as 
those between the right-hand and left-hand castes, or 
between brahmins and non-bralimins of more recent 
times. The general impression derived is one of social 
harmony, removed alike from the placid content which 
knows no ambition and the blind and ruthless pursuit of 
class-interests. 


(There was on the whole greater social freedom, 

especially among the upper classes, than 
social freedom. is now found in rural areas, and heredity 

was not always a bar to a person 
changing his occupation and his group-relations with it. 
This is clear from the fact that the Brahmins who took 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OP LIFE 35I 

to trade at Ennayiram were counted along with the 
Valanjiya merchants of the South bazaar of Ennayiram 
in one common group. 1 ) These were exceptions, and the 
Brahmins as a class were still devoted to their time- 
honoured ideals of spiritual culture and plain living, 
and commanded the voluntary homage of the other 
classes, as may be seen from the numberless endow- 
ments in their favour made in all parts of the country 
and by all classes without distinction. 


We lack all means of reaching a reliable conclusion 

Population. on ^ lc important question of the num- 
bers of the population. There is not 
even a passable guess on this subject in any of 
our records, Indian or foreign. And it seems never to 
have occurred to a government, which was very strict 
about maintaining a very minute record of land 
rights for its revenue purposes, that it might order a 
periodical census of the population under its control; 
for it is extremely unlikely that if such a practice 
had existed, we should have, heard nothing of it in the 
thousands of inscrijitions to which we owe practically 
all our knowledge of the organisation and work- 
ing of the government in those days. We are 
therefore driven to depend solely on rather vague 
personal impressions derived from a study of 


the records of the age. It is remarkable that most of 
the villages and towns known to us now are 
mentioned with almost the same names in the inscrip- 
tions ; some of them, like Uttaramerur in Chingleput, 


>343 of 1917. 



852 


THE COLAS 


Sendalai and Tiruvidaimaradur in Tanjore, Tim- 
verumbur and Lalgudi in Trichinopoly , 2 and others 
that could be named in the Madura and Tinnevelly 
districts, were clearly more populous and flourishing 
than the places that now go by those names. On the 
other hand, there is no evidence that the larger 
cities were not quite as large as the average Indian 
city of to-day, very large modern centres like 
Madras, and perhaps Madura and Trichinopoly, 
excepted. The average administrative unit in charge 
of one officer of the central government was more 
or less of the same size as the modern Taluq; but 
it may also be that the size of the Taluq is itself 
the result of an ancient administrative tradition. 
The evidence on the state of agriculture, industry and 
trade, on the army and navy, and on the amount, of 
labour and resources applied to the erection of public 
works of a useful as well as ornamental nature also 
tells in favour of our postulating a numerous and busy 
population. Internal peace was on the whole well- 
maintained; and there was no great difference between 
now and then in the ideas relating to marriage or the 
standard of life. There cannot be the slightest doubt 
that under the Cojas of the Vijayalaya line, Southern 
India was vastly more populous and that social life 
had become far more complex than in the ftnngam Age. 
It seems equally clear that the numbers of the people 
could not have been anywhere near what they are now 

*An inscription of 1219 A.D. from TufaiyQr (Trichinopoly district) 
mentions the Urmadil (town-wall), and pujulckadai-madil (wall at the 
backs of houses), an indication that towns and houses were sometimes 
walled for safety. (701 of 1009). 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OF LIFE 353 


after more than a century of pax Britannica . We may 
imagine that, we may find a parallel in this respect 
immediately before the establishment of British rule, 
say about the end of the eighteenth century. 

Caste- and group-life formed no hindrance to social 

co-operation for common ends. The 

Co-operation 

among classes. manner in which the burden of main- 
taining the services in a temple and the 
cost of feeding ten Brahmins regularly were shared by 
all the groups residing at Talaiccangadu 3 at the instance 
of the midaparudai (of the temple) is typical of their 
readiness to recognise a public interest and co-operate 
in its pursuit. Signs of exclusiveness and class-rivalry 
are not altogether wanting, but these tendencies were 
apparently well under control. Brahmins evinced a 
desire not only to live in separate rural communities 
with sabhas of their own, but as far as possible to"" 
exclude other castes from ownership of land in their 
villages ; in both these respects, their attitude seems to 
have had the general approval of the government and 
the people . 4 

Other classes also succeeded in obtaining special 

exemptions and privileges for them- 

speciai privileges, selves. The vellalas of Kunra- Vattanak- 

• • •• 

kottam gained exemptions from certain 
local dues in the reign of Rajaraja I ; 5 the artisans 

(silpis) of the Ovikula of Kanci had apparently the 
privilege of engraving the important copper-plate 

•198 of 1925. 

•46 of 1897; 311 of 1911. 

•875 of 1911. 

K— 45 



354 


THE COLAS 


grants of the king in the reign of Rajendra , 6 just as 
weavers of Kanci were the makers of royal robes in 
TJttama Cola’s reign . 7 On the other hand there were 
restrictions placed on the activities of some sections of 


Restrictions. 


the populace. In the devadana of 

Palaiyanur, the Ilavas were not to tap 
eoeoanut and palmyra palms for toddy . 8 Apart from 
such exceptional privileges and disabilities which 
formed the subject of regulation by specific agree- 
ments, the place and duties of each class in society 
were largely a matter of ancient custom which 
doubtless underwent slow and imperceptible modifica- 
tion under the stress of new circumstances. The 
economic bonds which united the members of each 
profession or caste come prominently into view in 
the arrangements recorded in inscriptions. The 
principle of collective responsibility was commonly 
observed, and even a soil of f rank-pledge by which the 
group guaranteed the proper conduct of each of its 
members was not unknown . 9 


(Some curious instances of mixed castes and their 

duties are recorded in the inscriptions ; 

Mixed castes. these show that the theories of mixed 

castes, mud oma and pralildma, were 
not the purely fanciful concepts of law-givers that we 
generally take them to be; either they had some basis 
in the facts of social life, or what is perhaps more likely, 


•Tiruvalang&tju Plates 11. 517-24. The Anbil plates were engraved 
by a single worker Vlra C6}a tak§an. Leyden grant 11. 107 ff. 

T Museum Plates 1. 10. 

*Tiruv&langS4u Plates, 1. 456. 

•197 of 1923; SII. ii, p. 251; TAS. v. pp. 29-30. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OP LIFE 355 


particular sections of the population began to pin 
their faith to particular sections of what was originally 
a mythical scheme. At any rate it is difficult to 
believe that the scheme of the four original varnas 
ever conformed to the facts of South Indian social 
life; even less credible are the theories of particular 
castes arising from mixed unions of particular types.'; 


Towards the close of the reign of Kulottunga I, the 
bhattas of Rajasraya-caturvedimangalam consulted 
the sdstras and laid down the professions to be 
followed by the analoma caste of Rathakaras, viz. 
architecture, coach- and chariot-building, the erection 
of goparas with icons on them and of mandapas, the 
manufacture of sacrificial instruments and so on. 10 
It is to be noted that the decision here recorded is in 


close conformity with the views of Vijnanesvara, the 
contemporary jurist and author of the Mitaksara, 
the celebrated commentary on the Ydjnavalkyasmrti. 
Prom an inscription dated 1169, the class of 
Rathakaras is seen to have included blacksmiths, 
goldsmiths and stone masons, besides carpenters. 11 
Two inscriptions of the reign of Yikramacola 
give accounts of a class of wtkrsta-dydgavas or 
patti navans which do not seem to fit in so easily with 
the extant legal texts, at any rate, not with the 
Mitaksara. The two inscriptions differ from each other 
and from Yajnavalkya with regard to the origin of 
this class; the smrti makes them children of Vaisya 
wom’en and Sudra men; one of the inscriptions calls 


'”479 of 1908. ARE. 1909. II, 45. Also the MitdkfarS on YajflavaU^fc I, 
95. 


“189 Of 1925. 



356 


THE CO^AS 


them children of Brahma-Vaisva, whatever that may 
mean, 12 while the second inscription quotes a Sanskrit 
verse which says that an ayogava is born of the union 
of a ksatriya woman with a vaisya; 13 on the whole they 
seem to have been accepted as a pratiloma caste. Their 
profession was weaving, and it was their privilege to 
supply fresh cloth for upanayana and other domestic 
ceremonies, for dhvaja-patas to the temples during 
festivals and generally to supply all things made of yarn 
and required by gods, brahmins, and kings. In 1127, 
some families of this caste accepted some iraiyili land at 
Tribhuvani and in return undertook to supply cloths to 
the local temple on specified occasions and in stated 
quantities ; they authorised the Sri Vaisnavas of the 
temple to surround (their dwellings), to imprison 
them, and take all steps necessary to force them to keep 
the engagement if they were in default. 14 In the very 
next year, 1128, twenty families of this class migrated 
from five different villages to Tirukkannapuram to 
settle there and accept service in the brahmadeya village 
and its temple; the terms of their settlement being 
placed under the protection of mahdsabhai elaim- 
badinar, the Mahdmbhd 350, and the Sri Vai§navas of 
the eighteen nadus , 13 

Inscriptions from Karuvur and Perur contain 
records of privileges accorded to Kanmdlar stone 

1 *208 of 1919. The statement In ARE. that they were the offspring of 
Brahmins and Vaisya women seems unwarranted. 

■»508 of 1922. 

“208 of 1919. 

“608 of 1922. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OF LIFE 357 

masons, of Vengala-nadu and Ten-kongu, and to other 
artisans elsewhere. 18 These privileges were granted by 
a Cola monarch whose identity could not be made out as 
he is described only as Konerinmaikondan. The privi- 
legcs were : the blowing of tw T o conches, the beating of 
drums and so on at domestic occurrences, good or bad ; 
the use of sandals when they went out of their homes; 
and the plastering of the walls of their residences with 
lime plaster. The construction of houses with two 
storeys and with double doors is also mentioned together 
with the right to decorate the front of their houses with 
garlands of water-lilies. 17 

if 

^No picture of the social divisions in South India 

under the Colas will be complete without 
R han /classed a reference to the broad division of the 

industrial population of the country 
into the Right-Hand and Left-Hand, Valangai and 
1 da,ny ai divisions. The quarrels among these divisions 
often threatened to till the streets of Madras 
with blood in the days of the East India Com- 
pany. The origin of this division is unknown. 18 
Legend ascribes it to the design of Karikala 
Cola and also, with more p laus ibility, to a famous 
occasion when the two sections of the population 
laid their disputes before a Cola king, one party stand- 
ing on the right hand side of the monarch, the other 

taking a position on the left. 10 } Several regiments of 

* ** 

’*66 of 1890, (mi. iii, 25); 562 of 1893; ARE. 1905, II, 43. 

1 *136 of 1905. 

J *M, Srinivasa Aiyangar, Tamil Studies : pp. 100 ft. 

"ARE. 1921, II, 47. 



358 


THE COJjAS 


the army were counted as of the Valangai in the reign 
of Rajaraja I, 20 and this section is also mentioned in 
an inscription of the third year of Rajendra I from 
Tiruvisalur. 21 There is a curious inscription of the 
reign of Kulottunga III which gives the earliest account 
so far known of the beliefs of the Idanyai classes regard- 
ing their origin. 22 They claimed to have been created 

from the aynikunda (fire-pit.) for the protection of the 
sacrifice of Kasyapa, and to have settled in the Cola 
country in the time of the emperor Arindama; this 
emperor imported a large colony of holy Brahmans 
from Antarvedi, and the Idanyai classes accompanied 
these Brahman colonists as the bearers of their slippers 
and their umbrellas. They got some lands in five villages, 
all of them now in the Tricliinopoly district, and had 
long lost the memory of their origin when they recovered 
it about A.D. 1128. They then entered into a compact 
among themselves to the effect that they should thence- 
forth behave like sons of the same parents. “If any- 
thing derogatory happens to the Idanyai class, we will 
jointly assert our rights till we establish them. It is 
also understood that only those who, during their congre- 
gational meetings to settle communal disputes, display 
the birudas of horn, bugle and parasol shall belong to 
our class. Those who have to recognise us now and 
hereafter, in public, must do so from our distinguishing 
symbols — the feather of the crane and the loose-hanging 
hair. The horn and the conch-shell shall also be 

! “SH. ii. Intro, p. 10. 

*>341 of 1907. 

,J 489 of 1912; ARE. 1913, II, 39. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OF LIFE 359 

sounded in front of us and the bugle blown according to 
the fashion obtaining among the Idangai people. Those 

who act in contravention to these rules shall be treated 
as the enemies of our class. Those who behave diffe- 
rently from the rules (thus) prescribed for the conduct 
of Idangai classes shall be excommunicated and shall 
not be recognised as Srutimans. They will be con- 
sidered slaves of the classes who are opposed to 
us.” This record was engraved at Uttattur and 
Tiruppannili by the Srutimans of the area. The ninety- 
eight sub-sects of the Idangai are again mentioned in a 
later inscription from Aduturai , 23 which records the 
hardships to which these sub-sects were exposed at the 
hands of the Vanniya tenants and the Brahmana and 
Yel]a]a landlords, backed by government officials. Such 
are the beginnings of an obscure, but deop-seated antago- 
nism between two sections of the populace which often 
burst into open hostilities in later days. At Kanci- 
puram the Valangai and Idangai sects would not 
worship in the same temple, or use the same pavilion 
( mandapa ) for religious purposes , 24 and the division 
affected even the class of courtesans and dancing girls . 25 

Names of individuals very often gave little indica- 
tion of their social status. Thus Arifiji- 
Personai names. madcvadigal, for example, was not, as 

her name might lead one to suppose, a 

**34 of 1913. 

'‘ARE. 1921, II, 47. 

25 The real history of the division between the right hand and left hand 
sections of society may indeed date from a much earlier time than we 
suspect or even the &rutimtins of the reign of Kulottunga III believed. A 
Chinese author of the 3rd century, cited by another in the 10 th, says of 
Fu-nan: “Les regions vassales ont toutes leurs mandarins; les grands 
officiers de droite et dc gauche dn souveratn s’appallent tous K r oucn-louen’\ 
P. Pelliot, he Fon-nan , BEFEO , iii, p. 282; also vii. pp. 316-17 for the 
same feature in Camp&. 



360 


THE CO^AS 


queen herself, but only a queen’s maid ( pendatti ) ; and 
her daughter, who lived in concubinage with a certain 
Arumolidevan, bore the name Bhattan Gandaraditti . 29 

Numerical names like Munnurruvan, Irayiravan and 
so on were apparently borne by members of all classes. 

(Women were placed under no restraints in their 

women. social life and activities, though 

modesty was considered the highest 
among their graces. The inscriptions give many 
examples of women of the upper classes owning 

property in their own right and disposing of it 
as thev chose/ The influence exerted by some of 
the princesses of the royal family on the public 
policy of railing princes has already been noticed. 
Though kings and nobles indulged in a plurality of 
wives, the monogamous family was doubtless the 
normal unit of social life. The employment of female 
labour in the less skilled occupations was perhaps 
quite as common as at present. 

Sati or the self-immolation of a woman on the 

fimeral pyre of her husband is occa- 
sati not common, sionally mentioned in the inscriptions, 

but the references are so few that it can 
hardly be regarded as a common practice in the Tamil 
country under the Colas.'; Gangamadeviyar, the wife 
of Vira-sola Ilangovelar, is said to have endowed a lamp 
before she entered the fire ; 27 this was perhaps early in 
the reign of Parantaka I. The Tiruvalangadu plates 28 

**235 of 192$. 

*’376 of 1903. 

**vy. 65-66. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OP LIFE 361 


mention the case of Vanavan-mahadevi, the queen of 
Sundara-cola, recorded in more detail in an earlier 
Tamil inscription of the reign of her celebrated son 
Rajaraja I. 20 The language of these inscriptions, to- 
gether with the absence of any other instance of a Cola 
queen practising sati, shows that the action of Vanavan- 
mahadevi was indeed applauded, but not often imitated. 
Three instances of women from among the nobility and 
the common folk committing sati come from the Mysore 
country. In 1057, a man killed a relative of the king in 
a wrestling contest, and was sentenced to death ; his wife, 
Dekabbe, the daughter of a chieftain of Nunganad, 
followed him in spite of violent opposition from her 
parents, and the whole story is recorded in the form of a 
pathetic Kanarese poem in the Kavya style. 30 The two 
remaining instances occurred in 1067 and 1068, one of 
them being just recorded as a fact, 31 while the other is 
mentioned incidentally in an endowment of a charity 
by the son of the deceased couple for their spiritual 
benefit. 32 A reverse instance of a father commemorat- 
ing the death of his son and daughter-in-law who 
committed sati also occurs in the Mysore country in 
1088 A.D. 33 Nothing can more truly illustrate the tragic 
conflict of feelings in a mind torn between the dread of 
physical suffering and the eagerness to live up to an 
inhuman standard of duty than the pathetic declaration 
of a woman, recorded in an inscription of the reign of 

“236 of 1902. 

“141 of 1898; EC. ir, Hg. 18; El. vi, pp. 218-9. 

“174 of 1911; EC. ix, Dv. 14. 

“188 of 1911; EC. x, Ct. 161. 

”499 of 1911; EC. iv, Hg. 100. 

K — 46 



362 


THE CO^AS 


Virarajendra from South Arcot; she avers that if she 
lived after the death of her husband, she should become 
the slave of the other wives of her husband and utters 
imprecations against those who seek to persuade her to 
refrain from immolating herself, nay even against 
people who do not come forward to bind and throw her 
into the fire, imprecations too shocking to be transerilied 
here . 34 Such a record could be only understood to 
indicate the prevalence of an atmosphere normally 
unfavourable to the practising of sati. 

teie class of courtesans has always held a consider- 
able place in Indian society. From pro- 

Courtesans. ^ 

historic times the nautch-girl has been a 
great social attraction. Her public appearances were 
usually associated with religious festivals and she was 
generally an expert in music and the dance. She mixed 
freely with men and was under no obligation to 
observe the restraints imposed on matrons in their 
social intercourse. Her private company was given to 
select friends, and her choice was guided at least as 
much by sentimental and aesthetic as by mercenary 
motives- To judge by the evidence of literature 
and epigraphy, there is little to justify the squeamish- 
ness with which the institution is viewed by the 
‘ social reformer ’ who derives his notions from 
the hideous traffic in helpless women and girls 
that has grown up in large modern cities. At 
her best the courtesan led a life of cultured ease 
and pleasure, and, like her Greek cousin, the 
hetaera, provided amusement and intellectual com- 

«<156 of 1906; AltE. 1907, II, 41. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OP LIFE 363 


panionship to those who could afford the luxury ; at her 
worst she was a temple-drudge who, when she consented 
to serve a passing stranger, still believed that she was 
performing an act of worship.') The testimony of 
Muhammadan writers is clear and unanimous that the 
earnings of the courtesans attached to temples were 
surrendered into the hands of the priests or other 
authorities of the temple for defraying the expenses of 
worship. 33 As these writers, however, were prone to 
repeat uncritically statements made by their^ prede- 
cessors, we should be slow to accept their evidence, 
which is not confirmed by indigenous sources. 

The social standing of courtesans in the ancient 
Co]a country is clearly indicated by the numerous 
records registering rich endowments made by them 
for various public benefactions and the recognition 
afforded by local powers to their public spirit; in a 
record from Tiruvorriyur, dated A.D. 1049, a certain 
dcvaradiyal (courtesan), Catural Caturi, by name, is 
also described as the wife ( ahamadaiyal ) of a citizen, 
Nagan Perungadan. 36 The marriage of another 
dancing-girl belonging to a temple in the Tanjore 
district is recorded in an inscription of the reign of 
Kulottunga III. 37 

v That a considerable element in the population, 

especially among agricultural labourers, 

Di8fV6ry» 

lived in a condition not far from slavery 
is dear from the literature of the age. There are 

“Abu Zayd, in Perrand Voyage, p. 124. 

“147 of 1912. 

“411 of 1925. 



364 


THE CO^AS 


several inscriptions which show that the most odious 
form of private property, property in human beings, 
signalized by their being bought and sold by others 
irrespective of their own wishes, w r as not unknown. 
Free men and women fell into slavery for various 
reasons, and it would appear that there were several 
grades among slaves. Most of the sales recorded in the 
inscriptions are sales of persons to temples: i Sometimes 
they are voluntary ; two ladies sold themselves and their 
dependents and relatives to a temple in the Tan j ore 
district; 38 in these instances, the religious motive must 
have been more dominant than the economic. But 


when six persons are sold to the same temple in the 
same year for thirteen kusns by another person, neither 
the voluntary nor the religious character of the transac- 
tion is so apparent. 33 There is another sale of eight 
persons recorded in the same place some years before, 
the price not being stated. 10 All these inscriptions are 
dated in the regnal years of some unknown Cola king. 
Another record of the reign of Rajaraja I from Tiru- 
vadandai (Chingleput), dated in the seventeenth regnal 


year, A.D. 1002, states that twelve families of fisherman 
( pattinavar ) were dedicated to the temple of Sri 
Varaha Deva at the instance of two officials serving in 
the locality as nudii-kankatci and nadu-vagai ; the 
families of the twelve persons named had each to pay, 
out of their income from weaving and fishing, f Jcalanju 


**218 of 1925 (seven persons for thirty kdius ); 219 of 1925 (fifteen 
persons for the same amount). ARE. 1925, II, 18. 

*‘217 of 1925. 

“216 of 1925. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OF LIFE 355 


of gold, and to assist in the celebration of two annual 
festivals in the temple, one of them being of seven days’ 
duration and ending with the day of Sadaiyam in the 
month of Avani, the day of the king’s nativity. The 
aabha and the ur of Tiruvadandai undertook to hold 
them and their descendents strictly to their obligations. 41 
The terms of this dedication are on the whole liberal 
and do not constitute slavery ; they even included some 
privileges of the dedicated families such as the receipt 
of pramdam (food-offering) on the festival days. But 
the element of compulsion, the hereditary nature of the 
dedication, the part played by two officials of the state 
and the undertaking of the sablid and ur to enforce the 
terms, prove that the dozen families of patti navar 
would not have readily accepted the arrangements 
ol' their own choice. Kulotlunga I ordered in 
A.D. 1088 that some ddvaradiydr of the temple of 
Kalahasti who had been wrongly appropriated to the 
palace service should be restored to the temple ; 
these persons had been stamped with the king’s 
seal which was erased and the trident stamped on 
their bodies in token of their servitude to the 
temple. 4 - At Tiruvallam, in 1119, one of the villi gal, 
(bowmen) of Bfmapuram, dedicated some women 
of his family as devaradiyar after stamping them with 
the trident. 43 In the reign of Rajadliiraja II is recorded 
a sale, in A.D. 1175, of four women to the temple of 

<'274 or 1910. 

<<141 of 1922. 

««230 of 1921, It is not clear what process was adopted for impressing 
the mark ( ilaccituti ) on the skin. The words ‘iftu* or do not 

necessarily mean ‘branding* as they are often rendered in the Epigraphicai 
reports. 



366 


THE CO^iAS 


Tiruvalangadu for a sum of seven hundred kasus .** As 
the term kasu is applied to coins of varying value, it is 
not possible to compare the price recorded here with 
prices stated in some of the inscriptions cited above. 
An inscription * 5 of somewhat uncertain dat<ffrom Tiru- 
valangadu ( Tan j ore) mentions some facts which bring 
out the general prevalence of slavery and the treat- 
ment meted out to slaves. A certain Vayiradarayar 
had a number of slaves, some belonging to him 
and others forming part of the dowries of his 
wives. With the consent of his wives, he sold some of 
these slaves to the local temple which purchased them 
for employment as slaves of a matha ( ma da-a dim aigol ) . 
In accordance with a sale deed, and a royal order 
( nlja-mdana ), the mdhesvaras and the authorities of 
the temple recorded the transaction in a stone inscrip- 
tion, marked the slaves with the trident-mark, and 
resolved to assign specific duties to them and punish 
them suitably when they failed in their duty. The 
inscription then states that after some time some of the 
slaves defied the orders of the sthanattdr of the temple 
and took to mischievous and roguish ways, and the 
matter was laid before a general assembly of the 
authorities of the temple and of the mathas. Their deci- 
sion is not easy to make out owing to gaps in the record. 
In fact the slaves would have been more than human 
had they not chafed at their lot. And as slavery was 
not confined to Temples, the idea that slaves consoled 
themselves by looking on their lives as dedicated to 

“80 Of 1013. 

“84 ot 1826. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OP LIFE 367 


the service of God can only have a limited range of 
application, if it had any at all . 46 There are also 
instances of slavery due directly to poverty; in times 
of famine, destitute persons escaped death by literally 
selling themselves and sometimes their unborn descen- 
dants for their keep. Only temples seem to have left 
records of this mode of accession to the numbers of 
their slaves; but we caimot be sure that rich and 
powerful individuals did not trade on the necessities 
of their less fortunate brethren . 47 

Some idea of the economic condition of the 

different classes of labourers may be 
wages and Prices, had by a review of the data on wages 

and prices yielded by the inscriptions . 48 
No general statement on the standard of life of the 
people is possible; much less can we now trace the 
changes in the standards and tastes of the population. 


'•ARE. 1925, II, 18. 

4, Some of the other instances known may be briefly mentioned here: 
Sale by three VeJJaJas of two women and their descendants as devaraQiy fo- 
nt Tiruvakkarai, South Arcot in 1099 (183 of 1904) ; a dharmaddna by a 
mahdrdya of an itvacca aijtimai in the TInnevelly district in 1105 (280 of 
1928) ; the gift of two slaves for service in a mafha in Dr&k§&r5,ma in 
1113 (354 of 1893) ; lists of adimais belonging to the temple and mafha in 
Kilaiyflr, Tanjore district, dated 1184 (74 and 76 of 1925); the large 
numbers of ma<Jaradimais bought and given to the mafha in TiruvaIanga<Ju 
by a nobleman in tiie years 1198 and 1208 (91 and 90 of 1926) ; the case of 
a VeJl&la and his two daughters who sold themselves to the temple at 
Tirupp&mburam to escape starvation in 1201 (86 of 1911) ; and the sale by 
two accountants of a temple of number of women who were slaves 
forming part of their ancestral estate — engajukku kramdgatamdy vartt - 
ffinzu atjAydr (296 of 1911). Yet other instances are found in 499 of 1904 
(Ved&rapyam, 1219 A.D.); 409 of 1925, a stone mason, his wife and four 
sons, (Acyutamangalam), 1219 A.D.; 223 of 1917, a host of over 100 male 
and female slaves of the temple, (Korukkai, 1235 A.D.)4 110 of 1892, same 
as 122 of 1912 (Tiruvorriyflr, 1235 A.D.) ; and 216, 217-219 of 1925 
(MSlapperumbalam, n-d.). 

44 See also 811., ii, Intr. 17-8 for a discussion of the data from the 
Tanjore inscriptions. 



368 


THE CO^AS 


The sources of our information are not sufficiently 
copious or precise to allow of such attempts being made 
with success. The permanent staff of village servants 
and others in the enjoyment of hereditary service- 
holdings are, of course, not included in the discussion 
which follows. So also the serfs and slaves arc 
excluded. 

The wages of common labour can be estimated 
from the following instances. The Madras Museum 
Plates of Uttama Cola record a wage of one I nr u n I 
per day and two kalanju per annum for clothes for a 
watchman; and six vtilis per day with half a kal/titju 
per annum for a gardener. At Lalgudi (Trichinopoly 
District), about A.D. 960, digging was done at the rate 
of fifty k tills per kdsn, each kali being about 10 feet 
square by two feet and a half. 49 In the village of 
Kiliyanur (South Areot), the man appointed to sound 
the bugle for summoning the sabha had, from A.D. 1001, 
a fixed wage ( ni van dam ) of two meals a day 
at the cost of the village, besides the supply 
of such things required for his personal use 
as were sold in the village. 50 In 1018 A.D., the daily 
wage of a wood cutter at Nattam (Chinglepuf) was 
four n ah's of paddy per day, 51 which was also the 
daily wage of a brahman cook. 52 The wage of a 
palanquin bearer at Tirumukkudal (Chinglcput) was 
also four nalis of paddy in the reign of Rajendra I. 53 

4 *104 of 1929. I have assumed that a puli is equal to 4". 

®°156 of 1919. 

*’263 of 1912. ‘ 

*=267 of 1910, (Tiruvadandai) . Same wage in 1115 A.D. (281 of 
1910) . 

•*175 of 1915: TintpiwUiccivikttik-kdvalar in the temple, possibly 
Vai$pava brahmins. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS: STANDARD OP LIFE 369 


This was obviously not a full day’s wage, for we find 
that garden labour in the same place and about the 
same time commanded a wage of ten null's per diem/’ 4 
The same rate is given in a record of Rajadhiraja I as 
a sort of family wage for the same kind of labour/’ 5 
For lifting water and irrigating gardens and fields, and 
for gathering flowers and other like operations, the 
wage of male labourers was eight 'nalis per day at 
Tiruvamattur (South Arcot.) in A.D. 1030; but women 
employed in making garlands and flowers were paid 
only at half the rate. 50 In the reign of Rajadhiraja I, 
however, the women servants employed in a feeding 
house at Tiruvenkadu earned a wage of two nalis per 
day. 57 A man employed to supply drinking water in a 

public place at Tiruvorriyur in 1077 was paid two kdsus 
per annum besides a daily wage of one huruni. 68 The 
rather low wage of two nalis per day for a potter and 
for a fuel supplier at Kudumiyamalai in 1213 was, no 
doubt, only remuneration for part-time work, 59 the men 
being free also to work and earn wages elsewhere. 

Work that demanded some kind of skill or special 
equipment in the workman commanded correspondingly 
higher rates of wages. A certain Ti ravel Araiccakkai 
was remunerated at the rate of two kalams of 
paddy for~each kilttu, some kind of operatic dance, 

•‘172 of 1915. 

8 *45 of 1925. The tapasyar who supplied water for tirumanjanam in 
the temple at Tiruvarfir had the same rate of remuneration, 671 of 1919 
(A.D. 1094). 

••18 of 1922. 

8T 450 of 1918. 

••154 of 1912. 

••364 of 1906. 

K— 47 



370 


THE COtiAS 


performed by him ; and seven such performances were 
guaranteed to him in a year in one temple in the reign 
of Aditya II. 00 Possibly he was free to accept other 
engagements elsewhere. With this may be compared 
the permanent endowment of a house and one hundred 
kalams of paddy per annum for each of the four 
hundred dancing-girls settled by Rajaraja I round the 
big temple of Tanjore. 01 Three Intrants per day was 
the wage-rate fixed by the same monarch for each of the 
fifty persons of the choir established by him for singing 
Tiruppad iya m in the same temple. 02 The wages men- 
tioned in another Tanjore inscription of the same 
monarch may also be noted: 03 each muni (brahmacari) 
serving in the temple got one padaklcu (sixteen nalis) of 
paddy per day and four Msus (two kalaiijus) of gold 
per year; 04 ten among them who had vowed permanent 
service in the temple were to get an extra kuruni (eight 
nalis ) of paddy per day; twenty others who apparently 
made garlands were to receive one padakku each per 
day and five Msus per annum. An accountant received 
200 kalams of paddy per annum, and his assistant 
seventy-five, which works out at 6§ k 
kurnnis respectively for a day. An accountant of 
another, perhaps smaller, temple at Periyakoiaikkai, 

iii, 202. 

**$11. ii, 66. 

**$1I. li, 65. 

**$1I. ii, 69. The schedule is unfortunately not complete on account 
of gaps in the record. 

««A record from Nattam ( Chingleput ) of A.D. 1018 (263 of 1912) 
gives two K&&U8 per annum as the price of clothes to be supplied to each 
mdni in a year. The Museum Plates of Uttama (11. 44-6) give the rate 
six n&lis per day and one Kalatiju per annum. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS: STANDARD OF LIFE 371 

Trichinopoly district, earned 1| kurunis of paddy a 

day in the reign of Rajaraja III. 05 An inscription from 

Timvorriyur 00 of A.D. 1038 states that two garland 

makers were employed each on a wage of 10 nalis ( one 

padakku and four nalis for both) per diem in addition 

to a kalanju and a half of gold per annum for clothes ; 

and four Brahmins to recite stotras and Y'eda, at 12 

nalis ( kiiruni and four nalis) each per day together 

with 1£ kalanjus of gold per annum for clothes. At 

Ennayiram, about the same time, 07 the persons who 

recited Tirnvaymoli were paid, like the reciters of 

T iruppadi yam at Tanjore, three kurunis per day, 

which is twice what the Brahmins of Timvorriyur got. 

The rate of three kurunis also obtained at Tribliuvani 

•« • 

for reciting Tirnvaymoli in A.D. 1048 cs whereas the 
officiating priest got only a padakku per day. A 
Brahmin appointed to expound the Sivadhavma at 
T irunages var a m in A.D. 1054 was also paid seventy- 
five kalams of paddy in a year, 69 the same as the wage 
of the Junior Accountants of the Tanjore temple. A 
namki, officiating priest in a temple, got two kurunis of 
paddy per day at Tiramananjeri, Tanjore District, in 
addition to sixteen kalams per annum in lieu of two 
kasus. 70 


•'268 Of 1926 (A.D. 1243). 

•"146 of 1912. 

•’333 of 1917. 

"176 of 1919. 

"214 of 1911. 

To 10 of 1914 (undated). A padakku per diem and five Kalanjus in a 
year for clothes form a priest's remuneration in the Museum Plates of 
Uttama Cd)a, 11. 42-4» 



372 


THE COJjAS 


/ 


(The currency of money of small denominations 

Barter did not altogether displace the ancient 

habit of exchanging things for com. 

The earliest Tamil poems state that salt and venison 
were exchanged for paddy ; to this day, in the villages 
of South India, housewives may be seen pouring out 
the grain from their stores into the baskets of hawkers 
and dairy-women in return for the vegetables, ghee 
or curd supplied by them.'; The picture of economic 
conditions under the C’ojas will not be complete 
without some idea of the relation of paddy to other 


commodities and to money. Cfliee was converted into 

gold at 9 k a ranis per kahu'ija and fifteen kalmns of 

ghee are equated to twenty kalanjus of gold. If this 

rate of conversion followed the prices prevailing at 

Kalahasti in A.D. 1012, the date of the record, 71 the 

price of ghee in those days must have been about a 

sixth or seventh of what it is to-day. A nuli 

and a half of curd was to be had for one nuli 

»♦ 

of paddy, 72 and paddy was selling at seven kahuna 
per pon-kalanju, a price which to all appearance is 
slightly higher than the present range of prices. We 
shall see, however, that the price of paddy in gold 
varied very much with time and place. At Nattam 
(Chingleput), three nalis of paddy fetched forty-eight 
betel leaves and twelve areca nuts 73 in A.D. 1018. In 
the same year, at Tiruppaugili in the Trichinopoly 


7 *299 of 1904. Another inscription of A.D. 1038 gives the rate of 50 
it alia per Kalahju at Tiruvojrjciyur (146 of 1912). 

72 Ibid. 

7 *263 of 1912. But 8 nuts and 32 leaves could be had for one nti# in 
1104 at Narasingapuram (same district)— 249 of 1910. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS: STANDARD OF LIFE 373 


District, a nali of good dholl was of the same value 
as five nalis of paddy; one pal am of crude sugar 
as two nalis of paddy; and one nali of paddy was re- 
quired to make one curry-offering in the temple. 74 At 
Tirumukkudal in Chingleput, in A.D. 1016, one nali 
of oil was bought for four of paddy, one nali of ghee 
for $ kalam of paddy, 75 and one measure of curd for 
two of paddy ; milk >vas had also at the same rate, and 
one nali of turmeric was got for one kuruni of paddy. 7 " 

Inscriptions recording endowments for charitable 

„ J feeding often lay down schedules of 

Food. 

expenditure calculated to give an idea of 
the quality of the food supplied and of the prevailing 
prices of food-stuffs. One record of A.D. 1004 from 

Tiruvadandai 77 states that it took § of a kalam of 
paddy for providing one meal to twelve Brahmins, the 

items of expenditure being: 21 nalis of rice at 1| nalis 
per head, (equal to 52 1 ndljs of paddy) ; 6 nalis 
of paddy for 1 ulakkn and 2i sevidas of ghee; 
5 nuJJs for vegetables and 5 for curds; \ nali 
for salt; 2 nalis for the man who supplied fuel, 
four for the brahman cook, three for the potter 
who supplied earthenware, and two nalis for betel 
leaves and nuts. Considering that this allowance 
of g kuruni of paddy per head sufficed for a square 
meal for an adult, the provision of l kuruni for each 
of the junior pupils and \\ kurunis for the seniors 


"91 of 1892. 

’•This rate of barter almost looks like a standard rate; it occurs In 
606 of 1920 (Alangudi. 1094 A.D.) ; 518, 515, and 512 of 1920, also from 
the same place with dates 1116, 1117, and 1125. 

’•175 of 1915. 

"273 Of 1910; ARE. 1911, II, 21. 



374 


THE CO^AS 


in the college at Ennayiram, and of £ and 1 kuruni 
respectively at Tribhuvani must be considered fully 
adequate to their requirements. An inscription of the 

reign of Kulottunga I, 78 dated A.D. 1115, records that 
an endowment for feeding fifty Brahmins in a Vaisnava 
matha on new moon days was made on the basis of one 
kuruni per head, and that this included provision for 
rice, curry, salt, pepper, ghee, curd, earthenware pots, 
fuel, areca nuts and betel-leaves. 

Some variations are recorded in the price of paddy 
„ . , and the rate seems to have generally 

differed with the fertility of the area 
concerned. Often these rates are not temporary prices 
prevalent at the time of the record, but some 
standardised average rates to hold good for all future 
time. At Tiruvallam in North Arcot we find the 
rate 40 kadis or 13 J kalams per kalaiiju recorded in 
A.D. 992 ; 79 and this is repeated in A.D- 1015 in another 
inscription from the same district. 80 Yet another 
record of A.D. 1012 frpni Kalahasti equates one port to 
seven kalams, and the pon was the same as the kalanju. 81 
Differences in the measures employed often make close 
comparison difficult. An inscription of Ylraraj endra ’s 
reign from Tiramukkudal (Chingleput) states that 
16 kalams of paddy by the Rajakesari measure was the 
equivalent of one kalanju. 82 At Tiruppugalur (Tan- 
jore District) eight kalams per kdsu, i.e., sixteen to the 

”281 of 1910. 

”218 of 1921. 

••176 of 1916. 

•>299 of 1904. 

••182 of 1915. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS: STANDARD OP LIFE 375 

kalanju, was the price in A.D. 1006. 88 At Cidambaram 
the spurious inscription of Rajakesari Rajendra gives 
the rate 8| kalams per kdsu, 8i or seventeen kalams to 
the kalanju. A Rajakesari record gives 15 kalams per 
kalanju for Pandaravadai (Tanjore) ; 85 the rate of ten 
kalams at Tribhuvani in A.D- 1048 is high, though not 
the highest price recorded in the inscriptions of the 
early period as the basis of a permanent endowment of 
charities. 88 Twelve kalams per kalanju is found at 
Nattam (Chingleput District) in A.D. 1018. 87 Early 
in the reign of Kulottunga I, the kdsa still equal to half 
a mdda, fetched only 2| kalams of paddy at Kolar and 
4 kalams at Tiruvorriyur ; 88 the relatively high price 
must have been due to scarcity consequent on the 
disturbances which caused the death of Adhirajendra 
and led to the war between Calukya Vikramaditya VI 
and Kulottunga. At the end of Kulottunga ’s reign, 
the kdsu paid for thirteen kalams of paddy in the 
Tanjore area ; 89 but even the mdda fetched only eight 
kalams at Emapperur (South Arcot) in A.D. 1136. 90 


Of the money prices of commodities relatively 

little is learnt from the inscriptions. 
Only the more precious articles which 
formed the staples of long distance trade seem to have 


Money prices. 


••68 of 1928. 

••118 of 1888. 

••282 of 1923. 

••176 of 1919. 

•’263 Of 1912. 

••131 of 1892; 106 of 1892. 
••44 of 1891. 

••633 of 1921. 



376 


THE CO^AS 


been bought and sold for money. The Tan j ore inscrip- 
tions tell us, for instance, that one kdsu (half-kalaujii ) 
fetched towards the close of the reign of Raj ara j a I, 
1£ ktminis of cardamum seeds, 2 kurunis of campaka 
buds, 605 palams of khaskas roots, 2£ to 3 kalanjus 
of camphor, 81 and two palams of sugar which 
seems to have been a luxury at the time. 92 One 
kdsu ( pon ) fetched nine ewes at Melappaluvur, 
(Trichinopoly District), in A. D. 931, 03 and at Sen- 
kunram (North Arcot) in A.D. 1014, 94 but a Tanjore 
inscription gives only three ewes for a kdsu . 95 A pasu 
(cow) is valued at fifteen kdsus at Tittagudi (South 
Arcot) in 1136. 90 The price of a cocoanut tree was 150 
kdsus at Nallur (Tanjore district) in 1221 if it was 
yielding fruit ( kd-tengu ) and 100 if it was not; 97 but 
the kdsu of the time of Rajariija III was a very 
depreciated coin. 

Of the value of metals we learn incidentally that 
bronze sold at 35 palams per kdsu (half kalanju of 
gold), copper at 30 palams, silver at 26§ palams, and 
tard (alloy) at 70 palams ; these rates are found in a 
record of 1099 A.D. from Tiruppanandiil. 08 The relative 
cheapness of silver may be noted in view’ of the opinion 

”3 Ka\. rate in 146 of 1912 CA.D. 1038) from Tiruvoxriyflr. 

**811. ii, Intro. 18, Table A. 

•*378 of 1924. 

•*149 of 1921. 

**811., 11. 64; 63, says six ewes=3 cows=l buffalo, 302 of 1901 equates 
one cow with four sheep In the reign of R&Jarftja III, year 16. 

••15 of 1903. 

•’68 of 1911. 

••46 of 1914; ARE. 1916, II, 23. 



POPULATION : SOCIAL DIVISIONS : STANDARD OP LIFE 377 


sometimes expressed that the metal was rare in South 
India. 

Some instances of scarcity and famine are inciden- 

Famines. tally recorded in the inscriptions, but they 
• are not many. Individuals were some- 

times hard hit and had, as pointed out already, to seek 
livelihood at the price of their j)ersonal freedom. The 
most outstanding instance of a somewhat widespread 

distress and the measures adopted for combating it is 
found in an inscription from Alangudi ( Tan j ore 
District) of A.D. 1152. 00 Its import is unfortunately 
not free from uncertainty. It states that there was 
a Kaladdsam, ‘bad time ’, in the third year of the 
reign of Yi j ay ara j endradeva who, after taking 
Kalyanapuram and Kollapuram, died on the back of 
an elephant. The king so described nearly a century 
after his time must have been Rajadhiraja I or 
his younger brother and successor, Rajendra II. 100 
The cause of the scarcity from which the people 
of Alangudi suffered is by no means clear. 101 But 
we are told that the people borrowed from the 
treasury of the local temple all the gold jewels and 
silver articles that could be spared to the extent of 1011 
kdlanjus of gold and 464 palams of silver in order to be 
able to maintain themselves and buy seed and manure 

••5 of 1899. 

i99 ARE. 1899, paragraph 53; 8IL iii, p. 191. But see above i, 
p. 311 n. 

101 Venkayya suggests that failure of rain was the cause and that 
R&j§ndr& II did not come to the rescue of the people because he inherited 
an empty treasury from his war-like and extravagant brother, 
R&jftdhir&ja I. ARE. Ibid . 

K— 48 



378 


THB3 06VAS 


for resuming cultivation. These transactions are re- 
called on the occasion of a fresh agreement with the 
temple relating to the terms of the repayment of the 
loan. 



Chapter XXI 


AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


Peasant 

proprietors. 


■ The vast majority of the people lived a rustic life 

ill the villages, and agriculture was their 
principal occupation. The prestige 
attending the ownership of land had 
a high social value, and the independent peasant 
proprietor was then, as now, the backbone of social 
life. It was the deliberate object of every one, what- 
ever his occupation, to have a small plot of land he 
could call his own. In fact, the village was primarily 
a settlement of peasants; and the village assembly 

was an association of landlords. ' Part of the land 

1 

surrounding the village was held in common, and the 
rest was subject till very recently to periodical 
redistribution ; 1 even now, this old rule of redistribu- 
tion from time to time appears to survive in some of 

the villages of Tan j ore. As evidence 
of communal ownership of land in Coja 
times may be noticed the terms sabha- 
and ui'-manjikkaiH,' and urppodu * 
to the village of land that was in 


Communal 

ownership. 


manjikkam ? 
the escheat 


s See BIT. i, 40. An Inscription of the reign of Kulottunga I from 
Lalgudi (142 of 1929) mentions the fact of the annual redistribution of 
village-lands tor uni kurittu varuffct lyfil&j 

nnd the disadvantages to agriculture resulting from the practice. Alsc 
441 of 1912 — lands held by 6aiiya nagaratt&r of Tirupp&ttuyai. 

*SIL iii, 156, 181. Is sabJidmadhyama of BIL iii, 7 the same word? 
*4 of 1890; 266 of 1901. 

M2 of 1903. 



380 


THE COpAS 


arrears for the irai on it , 5 and the sale of waste 
land by the village for being reclaimed and put to 

^ i ,***■*■ M 

some specific use. 0 ) An inscription of the reign of 
Sundaracola from Madhurantakam records the sale 
by the Sabha in a public maimer ( sabhai-xnlai ) of some 
land described clearly as part of the unappropriated 
common land of the village . 7 Individual ownership of 

land was clearly recognised also, and 
individual numberless instances of alienation by' 

sale or gift of the absolute proprietor- 
ship of the soil by individuals, and of the inheritance 
of such property from father to son in the normal 
course, can be gathered from the inscriptions. The 
theory of the law books is equally clear on the subject . 8 


Besides the land-owners, great and small, there 

were others dependent on agriculture. 
Agrarian labour. A fairly large class of landless 

labourers, an agrarian proletariat, 
some of whom were in a condition of serfdom, assisted 
in the operations and shared the proceeds of agri- 
culture. In almost all villages the distinction between 
persons paying the land-tax ( irai-kudiyal ) and those 
who did not was clearly established, and the former 
had usually a larger share in the tasks of local govern- 
ment. Each village had also a staff of hereditary 
menial servants of the lowest social class who were 
remunerated for their services to the community by 

•SII. ill, 162 . 

•220 Of 1901. 

•396 of 1922. Sec also 15? of 1922. 

•Moreland’s doubts on this subject ( The Agrarian Systems of Moslem 
India , p. 4) are altogether misplaced. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


381 


shares in the common land of the village. The 
artisans of the village had shares also in the communal 
land; these shares were of the nature of retainers, 
inducements to them to stay in the village, ready to 
take' up work whenever it came to them, the wage for 
each engagement forming the subject of separate 
negotiation between the parties. 

Some idea of the life of the poorer classes in the 


Life of tlie poor. 


villages, those in the lowest rung of 
the social scale, may be gained from 
the picture of Adanur with which 


Sekkilar opens his account of the life 


of the pariah saint Nandan. Though somewhat 


idealised in accordance with literary usage, it is clearly 
informed by an intimate acquaintance on the part of 
the author with the realities of country life at the 
time: “Adanur was a wealthy city of ancient fame in 
Merka-nadu. The rich waters of the Kollidam 

• • t • • * 

( Coleroon) seemed to pour out on either side the gems 
of fertility with their waves (hands), and the land 
appeared to receive the gift with its flowery hands 

(gardens on either side) The town of 

Adanur owed its great prosperity to its fertile 
fields and gardens, and had many tall mansions 
and a teeming population. In the outskirts of that 
town was a small hamlet of Pulaiyas studded with 
small huts under old thatches overspread by surni 
creepers and inhabited by agrarian labourers engaged 
in menial occupations. In the thresholds of the huts 
covered with strips of leather, little chicks were seen 
moving about in groups; dark children who wore 
bracelets of black iron were prancing about, carrying 



382 


THE CO^jAS 


little puppies whose yelps were drowned by the tinkling 
bells which girdled their waists. In the shade of 
the marudit trees, a female labourer ( ulatti ) sent her 
baby to sleep on a sheet of leather ; there were 
mango trees from wiiose branches drums were seen 
hanging; and under the cocoanut palms, hi little 
hollows on the ground, tiny-headed bitches were found 
lying quiet after pupping. The red-crested cocks 
crowed before dawn calling the brawny pulaiynr to 
their day’s work ; and by day, under the wide shade 
of the KCinji tree spread the voice of the wavy-haired 
pulaiya women singing as they were husking paddy. 
By the side of tanks full of warbling birds, the 
music of many instruments accompanied the drhiking 
fetes of pulaiya women who wore on their heads 
fragrant flowers and ears of paddy-corn, and who 
staggered in their dance as the result of increasing 
intoxication. In this abode of the people of the lowest 
caste ( kadainar ), there arose a man with a feeling of 
true devotion to the feet of £>iva. He was the 
unrivalled Nandanar who inherited as his share 
communal service in the neighbourhig township 
(ur-ppulamai) . Depending for his liveli- 

hood on his share of the communal land (land set 
apart by the town for pariahs in communal employ), 
and following the profession that was his by birth, he 
used to sujiply, to the temples of the Lord of the 
Trident, leather and leather straps for making drums, 
strings (guts) for lutes of various types and bezoar 
for the worship of the God of gods.” Workers of this 
class were indeed in a condition of serfdom, adscripti 
glebae with no freedom of movement 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


888 


From casual references in the inscriptions, we 


Day labour. 

jii 


can dimly perceive the existence of a 
class of hired day-labourers who 


assisted in agricultural operations on the estates of 


other people and received a daily wage, usually in 
grain. 9 There was no clear line of division between 


the absolutely landless agrarian labourer and the 


small peasant hiring himself out in his spare time. 
Garden-labour was hired for service in flower-gardens 
attached to temples at the standard rate of one 
maralikal and two ndlis of paddy per diem, a rate 
mentioned in two inscriptions of the years A. D. 1019 
and 1053 ; l ° and eight such labourers were regularly 
employed all the year round in a garden of the extent 
of seven padagmns in one case, and two for six md-s 
in the other. In several instances a gift of land for 
some public purpose, to a temple or m-atha, is found 
to include some portion set apart for the residences 
of the families of labourers engaged in its cultivation. 
Such labourers were not peasant proprietors by any 
means, and were nearer the class of hired labourers 


than of tenants; they were entitled to the use of a 


house-site near enough to the place of their work and to 
get wages fixed in advance, the proceeds of their labour 
on land being altogether the property of the institu- 
tion that owned the soil . on which they worked. 

Tenancy-cultivation was also quite 
Teoancy * common, both on private estates and 


•114 of 1928 from Ayyampettai records that, early In the thirteenth 
century, there was unusual need for employing hired labour as tho 
VeJl&las had dwindled in numbers owing to various causes, and that 
the daily wages (in paddy) of hired labour were mounting up. 

10 172 of 1915; 45 of 1926. 



384 


THE CO^AS 


on quasi-public land such as that of a temple; after 
paying the landlord a fixed melvdram determined in 
advance, the tenant usually retained as his share what 
remained after payment of the direct expenses of 
cultivation, and any minor dues assessed on the land 
held by him. The extensive class of service tenures 
may be taken to have invested their holders with a 
temporary proprietorship of the soil as remuneration 
for the particular seiwices rendered by them to the 
community or the institutions concerned. 

The data to be gathered from the inscriptions are 

still too fragmentary and one-sided to 
a caution. allow of a detailed account of the 

entire agrarian system of the time. Almost all 
inscriptions record transactions of a religious or 
eleemosynary character, and one can never tell 'how 
far the conditions described in them can be treated 
as representative of the general features of private 
cultivation. Considering, however, that cultivation, 
like other industries, was undertaken mainly to 
supply local needs, and that there is no evidence 
whatever of its having attained the capitalistic form 
in pursuit of profits, it is possible that there was 
little or no difference in this respect between private 
lands and those of public or charitable institutions. 
If the correctness of this surmise may be assumed, 
much of what is said below on tenures, irrigation, 
land-values and so on may be accepted as characteristic 
of the whole system. 

Communal ownership of land by the villages as 

such has been noticed already ; the 
Tenures. residuary claim of the state as 



AGRICULTURE AMD LAND TENURES 


385 


represented by the king to all unassigned land must 
have been tacitly assumed. For the rest, all cultivable 
land was held in one of three broad classes of tenure 
which may be distinguished as : peasant proprietor- 
ship called vellan-vagai in the inscriptions; service- 
tenure, comprising all the holdings described variously 
as jivita, bhoga, kdni, vrtti, and so on ; and 
eleemosynary tenure, such as brdhmadeya , devadana 
and sdlabhoga, resulting from charitable gifts and 
governed by the special terms laid down in each case 
in a separate document drawn up in set terms and 
engraved on copper plates or stone or both. Service- 
inams were also often recorded on stone, but these 
records were simpler and stated only the extent of 
the land held, the name of the person holding it and 
the particular service for which it was the 
remuneration, the details of the rights of the parties 
to the arrangement being left to be regulated by local 
custom. The three classes of tenure so differentiated 
may now T be considered in some detail. 

The term vellan-vagai comprises two words 

of which the first clearly means 
peasant ‘ cultivator. ’ Of the second word vagai, 

P P the meanings suited to the present 

context are ‘class’ or ‘manner’. That vagai is used 
in the epigraph s in the sense ot classification accoiding 
to tenure will become clear from our recalling the 
phrase nadu-vagai-seygira applied to revenue officials 
employed in the settlement of land-revenue ; the 
process of settlement ( vagai-seydal ) involved the 
registration of titles and tenures including those of 
K— 49 



386 


THE CO&AS 


the ordinary cultivators ( vellan ). It may be observed, 
in passing, that the classification of land in the order 
of fertility of the soil was called taram-idudal, 
grading. Velldn-vagai is clearly contrasted with 
other forms of tenure in the inscriptions. Kaiuppur 
was one of many villages appointed by Rajaraja to 
supply fixed quantities of grain to the Tan j ore temple: 
only such of its cultivable land as was classed as 
velldn-vagai, the devaddnas and sdldbhogas being 
excluded, was taken into account to fix its quota of 
the supply to the Tan j ore temple. 11 Again, in the 
Tiruvalangadu plates we are told in the most casual 
manner that the nonnal type of a tax-paying village 
was the velldn-vagai. The village of Palaivaniir, a 
brakmadega in the possession of the sabhd of 

$ i nga 1 an taka -ea tu rvedi man ga 1 am, was converted into 
a velldn-vagai village, the sabhd getting other land in 
exchange ( talai-maru ). After this conversion to 
velldn-vagai, Palaiyanur was made a devaddna of the 
Tiruvalangadu temple. The difference between this 
village and others of the velldn-vagai is clearly stated 
in the following terms: 12 “This ur is to be exempted 
from paying irai like other villages (held) by 
velldn-vagai; for every year from the sixth, it is to pay 
a permanent irai ( ninrirai ) of three thousand two 
hundred and eighty-eight kalams, seven kurunis and 

11 8II. ii, 5, paragraph 2. In the next succeeding paragraph the 
same term occurs among other phrases which are not easily understood. 
A careful study of the text shows, however, that on any interpretation of 
it, the term ve]\dn-vagai has to he understood in the sense of peasant* 
proprietorship. Its translation into ‘the portion of the cultivators' 
(Hultzsch) does not quite bring out the technical character that 
undoubtedly attaches to it. 

11 *811. iii, 206, Part III, Tamil, II. 19-25. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


387 


five nalis of paddy and one hundred and ninety-three 
kalahjus, (one) mahjddi, and one ma of gold as paid 
before including padi and palli ; 13 it is to be assessed 
accordingly and (the assessment) entered in the 
accounts.” Now, these words of the king’s order 
provide a peep-hole into some important aspects of 
the land system under Cola rule. The ordinary 
ryotwari village as we now call it was the vellm-vagai, 
having direct relations with the government and 
paying a land-tax liable to revision from time to time. 
Whether the settlement was with the individual 
cultivator as at present, or, as seems more likely from 
the strength of communal organisations and life, 
with the village as a whole, is not certain. The state- 
ment that Palaiyanur while it was a brahmadeya 
under a sab ha paid an irai of a large amount to the 
state is proof that a brahmadeya was usually subject 
to certain imposts payable in a lump sum of gold 14 to 
the central government. A brahmadeya could also be 
resumed on the holders being compensated by the grant 
of other land in exchange, and the land so resumed 
could be put to some other use, in this instance 

’•The words : “Ivvtir man iirutta pad iy uni palfiyum up-pa4a” are 
rendered by Krishna Sastri into: "as paid before by this village 
inclusive of paUi”. In other words, he takes t ruttapaQiyuni to mean 
‘in the manner in which payment was made', and the words in 1. 71: 
*iwUr pa\\i up pa4a irai hdtpina net in* may bo quoted in support of this 
view. But the • uni* in 'pwlvjum' is a real diillcuiiy in its way, and 1 have 
preferred to take 'pa<ft’ like * palli 1 to be some kind of tax or due, of 
which the nature is not clear. Seeing that it is omitted in 1. >71, one 
may think that it is either negligible or ciosely analogous to 

14 How much of the 598 kalahjus and 1 kauri, the total assessment 
on Singujan taka-catui. was due from Palaiyanur is not certain; possibly 
it was the amount of 193 kalanjus and odd mentioned further on. If 
that was so, the paddy mentioned along with this sum was the net sliaio 
of the brahman donees who had rights in Palaiyanur. A nagaram some- 
times paid its dues in gold (&/2. ii, 4, paragraph 13). 



388 


THE C6^AS 


converted into a devaddna. Quite obviously, Palaiya- 
nur was granted to the temple not as an ordinary 
devaddna, but as a velldn-vagai village with a 
permanently settled assessment of taxes which it paid 
to the temple instead of to government. The reason 
underlying this roundabout arrangement is not stated ; 
but one may guess that tlie intention was to leave the 
actual cultivators of the land in status quo. When 
the land was brahmadeya they were remitting in all 
3288 kalams, 7 kurunis and 5 ndlis of paddy and 193 
kalaujus, 1 manjddi and 1 via of gold as the land- 
lord’s share, and they were required to continue 
tnaking the same payment to the temple instead of to 
their former landlords. 13 Though in consideration of 
existing conditions a permanent settlement of the 
dues from the village to the temple was ordered, all 
that it meant was that the assessment was not to be 
altered as often as in the ordinary velldn-vagai 
villages; for though almost every order or resolu- 
tion was said to be perpetual at the time it was issued, 
there was no lack of readiness to reconsider it as 
fresh circumstances arose. And the language of this 
order which contrasts the payment by the ordinary 
velldn-vagai villages with the fixed annual assessment 
of Palaiyanur also suggests the possibility that in 
velldn-vagai tenure the state’s share was in some 
manner directly dependent on the annual yield. But 
of this we cannot be sure. Another example of a 
similar conversion of brahmadeya to a velldn-vagai 
devaddna is found in an inscription of the sixteenth 

* ‘Krishna Sastri, however, suggeets that this w as the tax paid 
before the village became a brahmadgya. tf/i. iii, p, 390, n. 1, 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 389 

year of the Cola-Pandya Viceroy Sundara by which 
five velis of land, originally brahmadeya, were made 
over to the Tiruvallsvaram temple as • velldn-vagai with 
an annual assessment of 642 kalams, 6 kurunis, 2 nalis, 
3 ulakkus, and 2| sevidus by the ndrdyam measuring 
five nalis, and 40 kalanjus and 3 kdnis of gold, of 
which five kdsus represented kdtei-erudu-kdsu and the 
rest uruvu-kol-nilan-kasu. 16 These instances make 
it clear that the vellan-vagai villages fell, in the reign 
of Rajendra I, into at least two broad classes — one 
directly remitting a variable revenue to the state and 
the other paying dues of a more or less fixed and 
standardised character to the public institutions like 
temples to which they were assigned. Which of these 
benefited the cultivator more, if at all, we lack the 
means of determining. 


An inscription from Nldur ( Tan j ore district) 
dated A. D- 1232, 17 records that after the village became 
free from the tyrannical rule of Kopperunjinga, the 
cultivators went up to the village sabha with com- 
plaints regarding their economic condition, and that 
the sab ltd fixed a new settlement regarding the dues 
in cash and kind to be paid by the actual cultivators to 
the landlords, pemugudigal, who were forbidden to 
use force in making these collections. The rate of 
kudimai was fixed at 22 kdsus for each mundirigai 
(1|320 of a veil) for a single crop, while vettik-kdsu 
and viniyogam amounted to five kdsus and one kdsu 
respectively; one labourer was to be supplied free 


“327 of 1916. 

”636 of 1921; ARE. 1922 11 25 has 1|32 by mistake. 



390 


THE CO^AS 


for each, kdni held and all extra labour availed of 
was to be paid for at the usual rates. Aliy extra 
dues imposed on the lands were to be paid by the 

perungudigal. 

Service-tenures were of various types. The 

assignments in favour of public 
service tenure, servants as remuneration for their 

official work under government have 
already been noticed ; these assignments were, however, 
only of certain rights to taxes and dues from land, and 
as such must be distinguished from direct assignments 
of land in lieu of particular services rendered. Such 
assignments of revenues from the land and of the land 
itself formed a normal method of remunerating 
military service, at least in later Cola times. Two 
inscriptions from Tiruvaduturai dated A. D. 1117 and 

1121 mention the grant of a consider- 
Military grants. a ^ e area ara bl e land, constituted 

into a separate unit under the name 
Kulottungasolanallur, as virabhoga for the enjoyment 
of the Kaikkolas, from Merka-nadu, who were of the 
iirudanam rank and served in the palace at Gangai- 
konda-solapuram. 1 8 An inscription of A. D. 1125 
from Sivapuri, Ramnad, 19 states that Su^ujan Gangai- 
kondan, a vassal of the king, promised to give as 
udirap-patti five ma-s of good land and three ma-s of 
poor land to the dependents of each of his swordsmen 
(yalilar) who fell in battle. He further promised that 
in case any of the servants of the valildr died in war 

”72 of 1926; 69 of 1926. 

”47 Of 1929. 



AGRICULTURE AMD LAND TENURES 


391 


or on account of disease, he would not recover any- 
thing as his dues from their relatives which they were 
not prepared to give with a good grace. Yet another 
inscription, from the Tanjore district (Kovilkadu), 
dated A. D. 1256, records an undertaking by Solagan- 
gan of Paiyur in Tondai-mandalam not to collect any 
dues over and above 600 kdsus and two kalams of 
paddy on every md from all the lands held by him as 
padaipparru ' 20 This is obviously an instance in 
which a feudal chieftain was allowed to enjoy the 
proceeds of taxes from lands assigned to him in 
return for his maintaining a stated number of soldiers 
ready for service when required by the king. 

Very good examples of service tenure proper 
come from temples and villages, which generally 
remunerated their servants in this manner. The 
temples often parcelled out their lands and assigned 
them as jivita, bhoga, or kdni, all terms are used 
indifferently, for persons who fetched water for 
bathing the deity, 21 kept watch over the temple 
premises 23 , sounded the conch ( sangu ), ?s performed 
the arcand and aided at the svl bali 24 , ,sang in the 
temple or trained songsters 22 and so on. The Sabhd 
of Jananatha-caturvedimangalam met once in the 
ninth year of Rajendra I to regulate the occupation 
of the lands of the local temple of Mahasasta by its 

*°194 of 1926, Pa#aip-parru is also mentioned with jivitap-parru 
and vanniyap-parru in 566 of 1919. 

**276 of 1923. , < 

**112 of 1914. 

**58 of 1895. 

**384 of 1913. 

**141 of 1895. 



392 


THE CO^AS 


servants and fix the nature and extent of the services 
for which the occupants were liable in each case, 
such as conducting worship (arcana), supplying oil 
for lamps, and keeping watch over the temple. 26 
Individual donors often ear-marked their gifts of land 
to temples for particular services ; slightly different in 
its origin, this type did not differ in any other way 
from the foregoing. The endowment of a vrtyabhoga 
(mkkai-kani) for the performance of ariyak-kuttti at 
the annual festivals in Tiruvaduturai from the ninth 
year of Rajaraja I (A. D. 994 ) 27 , and that of a 
tattdrakkani, goldsmith’s holding, by queen Dantisakti 
Vitanki attached to the temple of Tiruvarur from the 
fourth year of Rajendra I 28 , furnish instances of 
one of the common methods by which service-tenure 
on temple lands was created from time to time. 
Many items of service, high and low, to the village 
community were also remunerated in a like manner. 
Here again there was a double process at work; 
sometimes the village assembly took the initiative 
and set apart a portion of the common land 
as bhoga for the performance of specified services; 
there were also rich and generous persons ready 
to meet some pressing local need from their 
purse, buy land from the village community itself 
to create the necessary endowment, and leave it 
to be administered by the local authority. Of the 
first process there are several examples of bhatta - 
vrttis being created by village assemblies for the 

*•386 Of 1922. 

**120 Of 1925. 

**216 of 1894* 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


393 


maintenance of teachers in schools, or of persons who 
popularised culture by expounding the Puranas or 
philosophies in temples, and the hanis for artisans 
like goldsmiths 29 , for the village physician® 0 , or 
dancing-master . 31 A very common form that private 
benefaction assumed was the gift of land for the 
maintenance of dredging-boats and of men who kept 
the village tanks in good repair by removing silt, 
repairing the tank bund and in other specified ways 32 . 
Such land was called eri-patti. Another was the 
anibalappuram, for the maintenance of rest houses 
and public plaees for the supply of drinking water . 88 
In view of a gift of two mas of land to each, three 
carpenters of Romanatha-eaturvedi mangalam agreed 
to serve in the several hamlets of the village, accepting 
a reasonable remuneration for each job 34 . In fact, 
the universal prevalence of service tenure created for 
all conceivable purposes is most clearly established by 
the inscriptions. Its place in the tax-system gave rise 
to disputes which were settled by the general order 
of Rajaraja issued in his twenty-fourth year 35 . From 
this order, we may conclude that, unless there were 
reasons to the contrary, all lands held under service 
tenure were subject to the usual imposts, central and 
local, that were levied on land. The numerous 
instances of land being set apart for the maintenance 

*•210 of 1919. 

*•36 of 1898. 

"361 of 1924. 

"27 of 1893; 262 of 1921. 

**170 of 1894. 

"405 of 1926; also 206 of 1912. 

•*sn. 111. 9 . 

K— 50 



394 THE CtyiAS 

of lamps in temples are also best regarded as examples 
of service tenures. 

The main types of eleemosynary tenure were 

three : the brahma detja , the devaddna 

charity lands, and the sdJdbhoga-. The two former 

were sometimes combined in the same 

« 

village, a devaddna brakmadeya village 36 - The 
devaddna differs from tiruvidaiydttam 37 and tiru- 
ndmattuk-hani, the two latter terms being applied 
evidently to lands held in absolute ownership by the 
temple, like any other land-owner 38 . These tenures 
were created generally by purchase of land from 
previous owners and occupants, followed by a 
ceremonial gift in set form, the gift formula 
often giving detailed expression to the rights and 
privileges, and the obligations, if any, conveyed 
with the grant; more rarely, it was found possible 
especially for the king and the village assembly 
to utilise unassigned common land for such 
gifts. When land already owned and cultivated 
formed the subject of gift after purchase, the 
question was kow r to deal with the occupancy 
rights of the actual cultivators (kadi) of the soil. 

”127 of 1925; 388 of 1913.' 

,T 126 of 1896. An inscription from UU&ttQr (525 of 1912) gives 
the following classes of ipaiyili papru in the village viz., devaddna, 
tiruvidaiydttam, paljiccandam, aiyan pdtti, ma$appupam, agarappappu, 

bhafta^rtti. 

,s In 1222, a tenant in occupation of some devaddna land in 
Talaiccang&du, having fallen Into arrears with his annual ha4cmai f 
agreed to the land being made Hrun&mattukk&pi and leased out to new 
tenants, in lieu of his clearing the arrears; en pdrdl aftj&vadin 
edirdmdndu Mr-varai Hgaiydna kd&um veUaip-pdri nellum kappai vaikkOl 
tiraiyuui enndl pOkkapukkap-pdgddenpum innilam veiiyum paidn mudal 
viftu* vidu-tiftu tandu irniilattukku munbu kdyil pupapptofpa mdla* 
tddanangalum tarukipen enpu ndn vinpappaAjeyya. (209 of 1926), 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


395 


Closely allied was the question of the rights of 
kdrdnmai and miykdtci (or miydtci ), terms clearly 
corresponding to cultivator’s and landlord’s rights 
respectively. As the landlord might himself be the 
actual cultivator, the class of occupant cultivators 
was sometimes distinguished by the name kll-kdranmdi- 
udaiya-kudiyal, i.e. the occupants with subordinate 
cultivation rights 30 . Several inscriptions recording 
these gifts contain statements of the manner in which 
these questions were dealt with, such as kudi-nlkki- 
kkdrdnmai-miykdtci 40 or kudi-ningak-karanmai , 41 
It is curious to note that this conception of occupancy 
rights was sometimes applied even to movable 
property ; an inscription of A. D. 1006 from Tiruvai- 
yaru records that a herd of sheep was taken charge of 
by a person who undertook to maintain two lamps in 
the temple on condition that the sheep were treated 
as kudi-nikkd-ccdvdrmCiva-pperadu 4 ' 2 , full-grown ewes 
that neither die nor grow old and are held in fixed 
tenancy. One other subject for specific consideration 
on the occasion of such gifts of land to Brahmins, 
temples and feeding houses, was that of taxes and dues 
to be paid on the land after the date of the gift. 
Often these lands were made iraiyili either by total 
remission by the taxing authorities, central or local or 
both, or by the irai being secured by a lump sum pay- 
ment made in advance as irai-kdval. In the absence 
of a clear statement to some such effect, the lands 
were liable to the usual taxes. 

*•75 of 1896; El. v. p. 46. 

**811. li, 92. 1. 1. 

••Ill of 1906. Also ABE. 1929. II, 16. 

“218 of 1894. 



396 


THE CO^AS 


The Anbil plates of Sundara Cola record the 


gift as an ekabhoga-brahmadeya of ten 
Skabhoga. velis of land by the king. The adjec- 
tive ekabhoga implies that, unlike the usual brahma - 
deya shared by a number of donees, this gift was 
meant altogether to benefit the one individual named, in 
this case Aniruddha Brahmadhiraja. The land given 
away was marked off in the traditional manner by a 
public ceremony in which a female elephant was made 
to beat the bounds. The Tamil part of the grant 
records in great detail the rights and privileges 
conveyed by the gift which are more summarily 


mentioned in the Sanskrit part: “we marked (.the 


boundaries of) the land thus defined by erecting 
mounds of earth ( kani ) and planting cactus. The 
several objects included in this land — such as fruit- 
yielding trees, water, lands, gardens, all upgrowing 
trees and down-going wells, open spaces 43 , wastes in 
which calves graze, the village-site, ant-hills, platforms 
(built round trees), canals , 44 hollows; rivers and their 
alluvial deposits, tanks, granaries (kbttagaram) , fish- 
ponds, clefts with beehives, deep ponds ( kottagam ) 
included; and everything else on which the iguana 
runs and the tortoise crawls; and taxes such as the 
income from places of justice (manru pddu ) the 
kulam on (betel) leaves, the cloths from looms, the 
kdnam (of gold) on carriages, the pdttaon on shops, 
kdranmai and mlydtci included, the old tenants being 
evicted ( kudinikki ) ; everything that the king could 
take and enjoy — all these shall be made over to 


**Manzu, which Gopinatha Rao translates into ‘hails*. 

O^aiyUm v4aippum\ G. Rao has ‘ponds, breaches in rivers'* 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


397 


this mail. He shall be at liberty to erect halls and 
upper storeys with burnt bricks; to dig wells, big and 
small ; to plant southernwood and cuscus ; to dig 
channels in accordance with watering requirements; 
not to waste sennlr ,* 5 but to 'dam such water for 
irrigation; no one shall employ small piccottahs or 
baskets 40 (for lifting such water). In this wise, was 
the old order changed, and the old name and old taxes 
removed, and an ekabJidga-brahniadeya under the 
name of Karunakaramangalam constituted”. 

A similar charter of privileges with a few 
variations is found in other brnhmadcya grants, as 
well as in devaddnas. The Tiruvalangadu plates, for 
instance, convey these privileges in almost identical 
terms 47 , and some others like the prohibition of 
Slavas climbing up cocoanut and palm trees (for 
tapping them) within the area and the right to raise 
the bund of the village tank to its maximum height and 
to store in it the maximum quantity of water that it 
could hold. Sometimes restrictions were placed by the 
terms of the gift on the rights of the dcnee and his 
successors to sell or mortgage the land. 4S 

A deliberate attempt seems to have been 

made in the reigns of Rajaraja and 
Exclusiveness. Raj end ra I to maintain the homo- 
geneity of the brahmadeya villages by 

4# Rain-water? 

«• i have adopted ku4ai-n ir, See El. x\\ p. 72, n. 3. The Tiru- 
v&lang&<Ju plates (11. 445-6) confine this restriction to persons other 
than the grantees (annij/ar) . See also 103 of 1921. 

«»li. 426-58 far more elaborate in details than the Anbil plates. 
Also 103 of 1921 and others. 

*niB of 1902. 



398 


THE CO^iAS 


excluding all other classes from owning land in 
them. This policy was dictated, not so much by 
reasons like pride of caste and social exclusiveness, 
which readily suggest themselves to a modern student, 
as by the real difficulty of fitting into the constitutional 
arrangements suited to a sabha, other persons whose 
aims, needs and attainments were not the same as those 
of the Bhattas and Kramavittas. It has been pointed 
out elsewhere 49 that in large villages where such 
homogeneity could not be attained, the device was 
adopted of running two types of village assemblies 
side by side, the sabha and hr. But in places where 

Brahmins formed the bulk of the residents, and 
landholders of other classes were too few to be 
constituted into a separate hr, these landholders had 
either to be received as members of a sabha which 
laid down high educational qualifications for taking 
part in debates and for service on the executive 
committees, qualifications not easily attained by 
the common people, or they had to go without 
exercising any of the privileges normally associated 
with ownership of land in those days and without an 
opportunity of giving adequate expression or gaining 
proper attention to their needs. The only other 
course was for them to betake themselves to more 
congenial surroundings. Possibly difficulties of the 
character above mentioned were not foreseen at first, 
and no restrictions were imposed on ownership of land 
in brahmadeya villages; as in actual practice this 
policy gave rise in some place or other to the sort of 

"Studies, p. 78; ante pp. 279 ff. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


399 


inconvenience that was quite natural in the circum- 
stances, the king’s attention was drawn to it, when no 
satisfactory solution was reached by local agreement. 
There was issued by Rajaraja, in the seventeenth year 
of his reign, A. D. 1002, a general order 60 that in 
Brahmin villages, the estates ( Jmni ) of all persons of 
castes other than Brahmin be sold out, exception being 
made of servants holding land under some service 
tenure. The Brahmins were apparently expected to 
buy up the land and pay down cash, and a special 
officer was deputed to Rajakesari-caturvMimangalam 
to get the sabha to confomi to the order and make 
early payment; some of the land sold on the occasion 
was bought by the king’s sister Kundavai, who gave 
it to the local temple. A similar order of Rajendra I 
is recorded in an inscription 51 of the sixth year of 
his reign from Yelicceri, a brahmadeya in Puliytir- 

kottam. 

• « 

From the reign of Rajaraja III, we have an 
instance of the original land registers of a 
brahmadeya village, Talaiccangadu, being lost in a 
commotion, and the steps taken by the village 
authorities, with the sanction of the central govern- 
ment, to prepare a fresh register of rights based on 
prescriptive rights ( anubdgap-parroluyii ). The sabha 
record their sense of gratitude to the prime mover 
in this business of regulating titles and restoring 
order after the period of confusion 52 . The inscrip- 
tion is dated A. D. 1235- 

••46 of 1897. 

••311 of 1911. 

••218 Of 1925. 



400 


THE CO^AS 


Devadana lands were often marked off by means 

of boundary stones bearing tho 
nsvai&na.* emblems of the deity to whom they 

belonged . 63 The rights and exemp- 
tions enumerated in devadanas have a family likeness 
to those of the brahmadeyas, as already noticed. 
Devadana lands were managed by the authorities of 
the temple subject to supervision and control of the 
village assembly on the one side and the central 
government on the other. It was open to the 
authorities of the temple acting in concert with the 
local assemblies to award jivilas or hams to the 
servants of the temple as remuneration for the per- 
formance of services or the supply of articles required 
for use in the temple. Such assignments are some- 

V 

times made by the assembly acting by itself; for 
instance, the fir of Nerkuppai received as devadana to 
Tiru-mudu-kunram-udaiyar some wet land and a 
house from Uttama Cola; these they gave over as kani 
in the third year of Rajaraja I to a person who was to 
supply to the temple half pal am of sandal paste and 
quarter palam of bdellium, besides bathing materials 
on the days of the ayana-sankranti. 01 The temple 
often came by land of low fertility or even waste land 
which was sometimes dumped on it by village 
assemblies which found themselves under the necessity 
of raising money urgently for some public purpose. 
Such inferior land had a much better chance under 
temples of being improved and fertilised by persons 

9 *SII. i, 59; ii, 6, 61. 6 of 1909. Instances are not unknown of cash 
and the right to collect some dues being made d&vad&na. itaiyili — 363 of 
1999. 

“57 of 1918. For other instances, see 'service tenure’, ante. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


401 


who were ready to undertake the task as a labour of 

love; when improved in this manner the land usuallv 
* % V 
yielded a better income to the temple than before. 55 

In the reign of Rajaraja I, the lands in a devadana 

village belonging to the temple of Sucmdram were 

divided into two categories, on one of which the 

rental due from the tenants ( kanik-kadan ) was 

raised from 3 kalams per mu to 3 halams and a tuni, 

while the other which could not pay such a rental was 

to be directly managed by the officers of the temple 

( d&vakanmigal ). 56 On the other hand, in some 

instances the tenants occupying temple lands seem to 

have held them on more favourable terms than others, 

or, at any rate, to have had better opportunities of 

getting the terms of their lease revised when 

necessary. Thus the kanik-kadan due from Manabha- 

rana-caturve d i man gal a m to the Yisnu temple called 

after Rajendracola in Mannarkoyil was fixed at 3840 

kalams and odd; this was found to be too high, and 

in consequence the Cera Rajaraja-deva added ten 

velis of land to the original extent, and fixed 2600 

kalams as the annual rental on the whole village so 

extended. 67 Instances like this show clearly that a 

number of extra-economic considerations entered into 

the management of temple lands. The desire of the 

donor to secure the maximum benefit to the temple 

or its tenants from his gift, the readiness of tenants 

to squeeze themselves to help in the attainment of this 

”495 of 1918. 

“TAS. iv, p. 129. Kadan parrdda nilam (1. 21) does not mean lands 
exempt from taxes as understood by the editor of the inscription. 

”111 of 1905. 

K— 61 



402 


THE CO^iAS 


object, or, what was at least quite as common, their 
readiness to make an honest penny at the expense of 
a public institution if it could be done without a 
scandal, such were some of the forces that exerted a 
real influence on the terms of the lease. At any rate 
there was little chance that the relative economic 
conditions of the tenants holding of the temples 
exhibited any tendency to equality, such as custom and 
the methods of production and sharing were apt to 
produce among other classes of tenants. A curious 
inscription of the reign of Adilya II shows the value 
of the periodical audit of temple accounts by the 
officers of the central government; this is a record 
which details the detection of what looks very much 
like a deliberate fraud by which the temple of 
Tiruvidaimarudil was despoiled of 96 kalams of 
paddy, every year by its tenants who remitted only 
160 kalams as pancavaram where 256 kalams were due 
by agreement; the defence set up in the course of 
the enquiry was that the tenure was kudinikka-deva- 
danam, i.e. one in which occupancy rights still held 
good; but this turned out to be a false statement on 
a reference to the original deed recording the 
devadana, and the tenants were thereupon ordered to 
remit the higher rate of pancavaram . 58 

ill, 203. The fact that 160 kalams were paitcavCiram and 800 
kalams the tenant's share of the produce (1. 2), suggests that pafUwv&ram 
was a one-fifth part surrendered by the tenants of d&vaddna lands on 
their share of the produce. But we cannot be sure of this, as 256 kalam 
rate has no relation to any figure In the record. But there are 
Important gaps in the Inscription. I have used the words occupant 
and occupancy wherever the term ku$i is used in the original as it 
implies the actual cultivator of the soil, and not merely a lessee. 
Krishna Sastri, however, uses the words tenant and tenancy In the same 
context, as e.g. in the passage cited at p. 396. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


403 


An inscription from Tirumalam 59 , Tanjore dis- 
trict, dated A.D. 1112, records that Kulottunga I 
approved and sanctioned the proposal to remove some 
of the tenants in occupation of the devaddna lands of 
the local temple and lease out the lands to other 
tenants, because the former had allowed arrears of 
melvdram to accumulate and could not command the 
means to grow fresh crops without a break; the 
sanction of the king was obtained beforehand either 
because tenants could not be changed on devaddna 
lands without such sanction, or possibly with a view 
to forestalling future litigation by the displaced 
tenants. 

A record of 1215 from Narttamalai, Pudukkottah 00 , 
relates to a k udi-nlngd-devar ddn-am, created by 
the nagaram-, who sold some land to two merchants. 
The terms of this sale show how complex, and 
yet, how equitable to all parties concerned, the 
regulation of land rights could be. For all the dues to 
he paid to the king on account of this land, ulagudai 
ndyanar tiru-vdsalal vanda irai kudimaiyum marrum 
e P per ppattanav am, the nagaram held themselves res- 
ponsible even after the sale. The two persons to whom 
the land was sold in equal shares had to give to the 
temple 30 kalams of paddy each in any year in which 
the yield of the whole of the land w T as normal ; in lean 
years, they had to remit 2| kalams on each md of land 
actually cropped Qvilainja nilattukku ) . The land was 
declared to be in the last grade (taram), and was asses- 
sed as such for all time. Clearly here the rights of the 

•»93 of 1910. 

••Pd. 170. 



404 


THE CO^AS 


temple were confined to the melvdram at a rate fixed 
beforehand, the tenants keeping the balance of the 
yield and not having to pay the taxes due to the 
central government, as these were paid by the nagaram. 


The prosperity of an agricultural country 

depends to a large extent on the 
irrigation. facilities provided for irrigation, and 

the importance of securing an adequate 
water supply was recognised in South India from 
very early times. Natural streams and dependable 
channels leading off from them were the first source 
of supply: but for the passing mention, in an inscrip- 


tion at Tiruvaduturai 61 , of a Parakesari Karikiilacola 


who raised the banks of the Kaveri, we hear little, 
in inscriptions, of the methods adopted to turn natural 
streams to account. Much literary evidence can be 
cited to show that the prosperity of the Coja country 
proper was a gift of the Kaveri, and practically all the 
names now known of the many branches of this great 
stre am in the delta country are traceable in the Cola 
inscriptions. In the absence of natural streams, re- 
course was had to tanks, and the bulk of the evidence 
on irrigation from the inscriptions relates to the care 
bestowed on the proper maintenance of the tanks. The 
Cola-varidhi of Sholingur, the Kaliyaneri near 
Anaimalai in Madura, the Ka]linangaikulam at 


Solapuram, the Vairamegha-tataka of Uttaramerur 
dating from Pallava times, the 1 big tank of Bahtir, 
and the Rajendrasolap-periya-eri at Punganur are 
only the leading examples of a very large number of 


•>110 of 1926. 



AGRICULTURES AND LAND TENURES 


405 


irrigation tanks mentioned in the inscriptions. The 
primary care of the village assemblies was to get the 
silt removed every year from the tanks under their 
control in time for them to secure the proper depth 
needed to store the full supply for the next year before 
the rains set in. Often special endowments were created 
in relation to each tank to safeguard this important 
work from the neglect or the penury of ^village 
authorities. Even where as in Bahur or Tribhuvani 62 , 
the annual repairs were not provided for by specific 
endowments, a special cess, the eri-dyam, ear-marked 
for this purpose was collected from the ryots 
in the village, the rate in the instances mentioned 
being one padakku of grain per md of cultivated land. 
The water-rights attaching to particular plots of land 
were often enumerated on the occasions when they 
changed hands by sale or gift. Where natural levels 
were not favourable for the flow of water, and it had to 
be lifted, piccotalis and baskets were commonly em- 
ployed for tiie purpose. The water lift worked by 
bulls may have been known, but finds no place in the 
inscriptions. In A.D. 1110 there is recorded a breach 
of the tank of Tirukkanji in a storm and the repairs 
effected to it by a local Araiyan; the repairs included 
the construction of a stone revetment to the banks 
(karpadai) 69 . A tank near Tirukkaccur was extended, 
and a fresh sluice erected at the cost of a temple, in 
order that the lands of the temple may be properly 
irrigated ; the tank originally belonged to the people 

”178 of 1902; 192 of 1909. 

”215 Of 1919. 



406 


THE CO(iAS 


of iSengunram, and their consent was obtained before 
the extension of the tank was undertaken. The water 
in the tank was to be distributed between the villagers 
and the temple in the ratio of their holdings 64 . Such 
examples, which may be easily multiplied, furnish 
clear evidence of the vivid realisation by the people 
of the importance of irrigation and of their readiness 
to meet and solve irrigation problems in a reasonable 
spirit. 

Another aspect of agriculture that deserves 

special mention is the steady progress 
Reclamation. of reclamation of forest and waste 

land that was being brought under 
the plough. Popular tradition ascribes to the Pallava 
kings or to Karikala, the early Cola monarch, 
the credit of having disafforested large tracts of 
South India and made them fit for agriculture and 
human habitation. Whatever the historical value of 
such traditions, epigraphy gives unmistakable proof 
of the deliberate efforts made from time to time and 
by easy stages, to increase the area under the plough 
and the inducements offered to encourage such 
efforts on the part of the people, by way of concessions 
in taxes, favourable terms of lease in the initial 
years and so on. It is needless to reproduce here 
details which may be easily gathered from the 
inscriptions 65 . 


“295 of 1909. 

••357 of 1924, 287 of 1911, 385 of 1903, 485 of 1902, 506 Of 1902, etc. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


407 


The evidence on the yield of land and land 

values is by no means clear or copious. 

Yield ot land. The number of crops raised each year 

on paddy lands was two, sometimes 
three 60 . No direct statement on the gross yield of 
land can ordinarily be traced in the inscriptions and 
the landlord’s share called melvdram, bhogam or 
even irai at times, is expressed in different ways. 
One of the very few instances where the gross yield is 
set down is the Cidambaram inscription of Rajakesari 
Rajendra 67 which says that 44 veils of land yielded in 
all 4500 Jcalams of paddy, and that the melvdram on 
this was fifty per cent of the yield. A Mysore inscrip- 
tion of the. time of Rajadhii’aja gives the melvdram 
rate as two-fifths for wet land and one-fourth for 
areas under dry cultivation 68 . The inscriptions of 
Tiruvorriyur show clearly that waste land newly 
brought under cultivation could not yield more than 
was enough to justify the rather low melvdram of 30 
kalams per veil in one instance, and 28 kalams and 19 
kalams for two different classes of land in another. 69 
An inscription of the sixth year of Rajendra I from 
Nattam (Chingleput) states that the landlord’s share 
per kuli of cultivated land was a kuruni and five 
nMis™' In 1124, land (ninety veils) was given as 
devaddna and madappara iraiyili at Yrddliacalam, on 
the basis of an irai, tax payable to government, of forty 

”271 Of 1916. 

"118 of 1888. This record, though faulty in many ways, may, 
nevertheless, be accepted as genuine In this part. 

• 8 505 of 1911. 

••103 of 1912. AUE. 1912, II, 22. Also 228 of 1912. 

"•263 of 1912. 



408 


THE CO^AS 


kalams of paddy per veli by the Rajakesari measure 
( marakkal ). 70 From an inscription at Erumur, 
South Arcot district, dated 1152, it is seen that some 
devadana land, apparently of very good quality, was 
assessed at 2 6£ kalams per ma, equal to 525 kalams 
per veli or nilam, inclusive of k adorn ai, pddi-kdval, 
silvan and any other taxes and cesses due therefrom 71 . 
Lastly, a record from Periya-korukkai (Trichinopoly 
district) of the reign of Rajaraja III shows that some 
devadana lands there paid an all inclusive tax of 20 
kalams of paddy on wet land ( nansey ) and 10 kalams. 
on dry land ( punjai) 72 . 

Figures bearing on the value of land reveal 

equally disparate conditions. The 
Land value. prices stated differ so widely from 

place to place and among different 
transactions that it is impossible to attempt a detailed 
explanation of such differences without an accurate 
knowledge of the quality of the land concerned or to 
institute comparisons with present conditions in 
respect of land-values- A rough idea may be gathered 
from a few examples chosen at random which will 
show not merely the difference in values, but wide 
divergences in the rates at which future dues on land 
were capitalised, for the advance payment of the irai- 
kaval, the ‘tax-fund’ as it may be called. At Tiru- 
vaiyaru ( Tan j ore Dt.), in A. D. 1006, one veli of land 
was sold for 100 kalanjus of gold 78 . At Kuttalam in 

”63 of 1918. 

”397 of 1913. 

’*266 of 1926; ARE . 1926, II. 29. 31 of 1891 gives the rate five 
kalams on puftjat lands at Jambukegvaram, A.D. 1117. 

f, 219 of 1894. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


409 


Tinnevelly, 8 md-s of land including the tax-dues on it 
were valued at 43 kdsus in the fourth year of 
Rajendra I 74 . Two years later, in the Tan j ore 
district, 2 velis and 8 md-s of wet land including a 
tank together with dry land of the same extent were 
sold for the low amount of 10 kdsus, though the irai- 
kdval on it was 190 kdsus 75 . The low sale price in this 
instance was perhaps due to the sale being that of 
common land ( sabhaip-podu ) and to the temple. In 
the same year and place, another sale records the price 
of 40 kdsus and irai-kaval of 90 for just one veli of 
land, which looks more normal 70 . One Madhurantakan- 
madai fetched two hundred and fifty kulis of land or 
one-eighth of a veli at Tiruvorriyur in the thirtieth 
year of Rajendra I. 77 Land of the extent of three 
and a half velis and two md-s was sold for 50 kdsus 
and an equal amount provided for bringing it under 
the plough at Tiruvarur in the eighth year of 
Rajendra II 78 . One veli of land was sold at 20 kdsus 
at Kanclpuram in 1073, and for a little less at Tiru- 
vorriyur 79 . In 1126, dry land of the extent of 4250 kulis 
was sold for twenty kdsus at Tiruvottur, North Areot 80 . 
In 1133, four velis of land fetched a price of 90 kdsus 
at Uttattur, Trichinopoly district, each kdsu being 
equal to three-fourths of a kalanju of gold 81 . Land 
yielding a melvdram of 120 kalams per veli was valued 

"104 of 1926. 

’•102 of 1925. 

"109 of 1925. 

"156 of 1912. 

"677 Of 1919. 

"522 of 1919; 133 of 1912. 

•°88 of 1900. 

"509 of 1912. 

K— 52 



410 


THE CO^AS 


at 40 kdsus and 45 kdstis at Tiruvarur, Tanjore 
district, in the tenth regnal year of Kulottunga II, 

A. D. 1143. 81 ® 

The kdsu, as pointed out elsewhere, underwent a 
rather steeply progTessive debasement, or more pro- 
bably the term came to be applied in later inscriptions 
to a new coin of much lower denomination. The price 
of land as stated in terms of this new coin will not bear 
any direct comparison with the prices mentioned above. 
Thus at Tiruppalanam, one ma of land was valued 
at 2000 kdsus, working to 40,000 kdsus per veil, in 
A.D. 1214 82 , and the price of one veli at Kumbakonam 
in 1220 is said to have been 25,747 kdsus* 3 . About the 
same time, one ma of land which stood in need of 
reclamation was valued in Tiruvenkadu at 1334 kdsus, 
the cost of reclamation being estimated at 500 kdsus* 4 . 
Again land of the extent of 2 velis and 19 nid-s was 
sold at Kumbakonam in A. D. 1221 for a sum of 
450,000 kdsus 85 . About the same time, house-site was 
valued at 40 kdsus per kuli at Nallur and 16 kdsus at 
Tiruvalangadu (Tanjore) 86 . It would seem that the 
kdsu became a coin of somewhat higher value after the 
close of the reign of Rajaraja III ; for the inscriptions 
of Rajendra III record prices of landed property that 
suggest such a conclusion. Two house-sites of the 

•>•553 of 1804. 

•>180 of 1928. cf. 6 at 13,000 kdius (Tiruv&gutujfai), 156 of 
1925— A.D. 1238. 

“298 of 1927. 

*‘504 of 1918. 

“229 of 1927 — ndlu nHxdyiraitu aimbadinSyiramum. cf. munn&T- 
&yiratta£u.paAin&yiram of 626 of 1920. The lakh was evidently unknown. 

“58 Of 1911; 96 of 1926. 



AGRICULTURE AND LAND TENURES 


411 


total extent of twelve manaik-kol were sold for 700 
kasus at Kuttalam (Tanjore) in A. D. 1261 87 ; one 
veli and 16 mas of agricultural land were exchanged 
five years later, at Tirukkannapuram, for 5350 
kasus, which, we learn, was the equivalent of thirteen 
kalanjus of gold 88 ; lastly, at Tiruvilimilalai, nineteen 
mu - s of land lound a sale for 1000 kasus and a house- 
site of 10 hubs for 300 kasus , in 1267 89 . Rajendra III 
made a great effort to resuscitate the Cola empire, and 
a reform of currency must have been part of his plan. 
It will be noted also that most of the records of the 
later Co]a period come from the Tanjore district, 
proof of the Availing and disappearance of the direct 
influence of the central government in the outlying 
parts. 

In comparing the figures cited above with one 
another, it should be borne in mind that neither the 
unit of measurement nor the unit of currency was 
constant, and that owing to local variations in the 
length of the measuring rod and the number of kulis 
that went to the ma, and owing to the currency of 
various types of old and new 7 money of varying weights 
and fineness, any attempt to make a detailed 
comparison is rendered altogether fruitless. 


Closely allied to agriculture was cattle-raising 


Cattle. 

shepherds. 


and dairy-farming, an industry pur- 
sued generally by the manradis or 
Here again, we depend much on the 


•’495 of 1907. 
••522 of 1922. 
••399 Of 1908. 



412 


I’HE COtiAS 


temple records for our information. The manradis 
seem to have been organised in a professional caste 
group ( kalanai ), and generally taken charge of the 
cattle donated to the temples for the maintenance' of 
lamps under stated conditions. Though the pasu 
(cow) and ddu (ewe) are sometimes used only as units 
of reckoning, still in the majority of instances there 
is no doubt that live animals are meant, and often 
enough, breeding bulls and rams form part of the gifts. 
The importance of cattle-farming may also be inferred 
from the names of several imposts the exact nature of 
which is not fully known, such as nalld, nallerudu, 
cdagerudu-kasu and so on. 



Chapter XXII 
INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

y 

(In most of the common industries the rule was 

production for the local market. The 
c “ nd i u ° n . s of existence of a brisk internal trade in 

Production 

and Trade. several articles is indicated by the 

evidence of the movements of individual 
merchants and the highly organised state of the 
mercantile corporations in various parts of the 
country. A merchant from the malai-nadu (Malabar) 
is seen trading in Tiruvadandai in the Chingleput 
district 1 , and one from Mylapore is found in Tanjore 2 ; 
and a man from Ceylon endows a lamp in the temple 
at Suclndram (South Travancore)*. These are not 
isolated instances, but representative of a large class 
of similar facts recorded in the inscriptions which 
show that there was a free and active business inter- 
course between the different parts of the empire^ The 
expansion of Cola rule was followed by the organisa- 
tion of a strong centralised administration under a 
single political power. Except for a few local risings 
leading to punitive expeditions from time to time, 
peace was maintained for successive generations over 
a wide area, which had been cut up till then into a 
number of independent warring states. In the more 
settled conditions of the new era, the industrial arts 

<263 Of 1910. 

*147 of 1896. 

*71 of 1898. 



414 


THE COtiAS 


obtained greater encouragement and the opportunities 
for trade increased. 


The metal industries and the jewellers’ art had 


Metal work. 


reached a high state of perfection. 
Household utensils made of metal were 


apparently confined to the rich, 
earthenware being often mentioned in connection 
with cooking and eating in solas, charitable feeding 
halls. The detailed descriptions of the images and 
utensils of the Tanjore temple recorded in the inscrip- 
tions, and the bronzes of the period that have survived 
to this day give proof of the mastery attained by the 
braziers of the time in the art of manipulating alloys 
of metals and casting them into the most elaborate and 
graceful forms. Copper, bronze and brass were 
employed in such work, besides gold and silver. Tho 

variety of jewels and ornaments of 
jewellery. gold, and precious stones, and the 

careful record of the numbers and 


classes of the stones and pearls mounted on each of 
these would be enough to enable a modern jeweller to 
reproduce most of them if only he knew their general 
formation; many of the ornaments mentioned have 
long since gone out of use, and no really old ornament 
has survived the ravages of invasion and war; the 
Tanjore inscriptions however enable one to see that 
the jeweller’s art reached its high-water mark under 
the Colas, and that the Tanjore jewellers produced the 
most pleasing results by studying the dispositions of 
precious stones and pearls with a view to their colour 
effects. If it is remembered that temples were only 
glorified palaces, that gods received all the honours 



4 


INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


415 


due to kings ( rdjopacdra ), that kings were the models 
for their subjects to follow, and if, further, it is 
realised that the Tan j ore temple differs from the 
hundreds of other temples only in its greater size and 
in the accuracy and completeness of its surviving 
inscriptions, it will be seen that it. is not easy to 
exaggerate the importance of the amount of wealth 
held in the form of jewels or the flourishing state of 
the goldsmith’s trade. Neither the depredation of 
invading hosts nor. the security of established govern- 
ment has succeeded in weaning the people from the 
hoarding habit. Pax Britannica has hardly been more 
potent in this respect than Malik Kafur and Hyder 

All. 


The inscriptions contain only a limited number of 

references to the daily occupations and 
Sait. arts of the population, and we 

have to eke out this scanty infor- 

•m * **’ ' 

mation from literature and sculpture. The manu- 
facture of sea-salt was carried on under govern- 
ment supervision and control, and subject to 
considerable imposts in kind and money, local and 
central. The salt-pans of Markanam, Kanyakuraari, 

Yariyur, and Ayturai were among the more important 
centres of salt manufacture, which was a widespread 
industry all along the sea coast 4 . Some of the salt 
pans at Bapatla were lost owing to encroachment by 
the sea, and this fact is recorded in 1112.® 

*23, 24 of 1919; TAS, 1, pp. 162-4, 247-8 ; 239 of 1925. 

•207 of 1897. 



416 


THE COJiAS 


A conspicuous example of particular industries 
obtaining special recognition in court or in a big 
Relation of temple is furnished by the weavers of 
^ourt^and 0 Kancipuram. There were four wards 
temple. ( pudis ) of the city inhabited by the class 

of ! weavers known as Pattasalins ; they had the dis- 
tinction of being appointed weavers of royal garments, 
and Uttama Cola appointed them to the management 
of the financial affairs of the temple of Uragam in 

Kancipuram. The poor residents of Solaniyamam 
were exempt from the payment of all royal dues in 
return for their undertaking to maintain the temple 
accounts properly and submit them to monthly audit 
by the weavers who had the management of the 
temple, an arrangement ratified by the nagaram of 
Kancipuram as well 0 . 


Of the conditions of transport in internal trade it 

is not possible to give a detailed 
Transport. account. In South India there was very 

little scope for the use of natural 
water-ways for the carriage of merchandise in the 
interior, and there is no evidence that canals were 
made for any purpose other than the irrigation of 
agricultural lands. Roads are mentioned in several 
inscriptions from all parts of the country, when 
the boundaries of lands and villages are described. 
To maintain these roads, great and small, in good 
repair was part of the duty of local authorities and 
the villagers were often expected to give freely the 
labour (vetti, amanji) required for it. Two classes 

‘Museum plates of Uttama CCJa. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


417 


of roads may be distinguished; the vadis were 
only slightly better than foot-paths and apparently 
not jsuited to wheeled traffic."/ One such vadi in 
Uttaramerur was washed away by the floods and the 
path became unfit for use even by cattle; in remaking 
the path, the sabhd decided to widen it and purchased 
the adjoining lands from the ryots to whom they 
belonged 7 . (The better class of roads is called pem-vali, 
the great road, in the inscriptions. These were the 
trunk roads leading from one large division of the 
country to another, "ys is seen from their names like the 
Andhra road, Vaduyapperuvali or Andhra-patha 8 , the 
great road to Kongu ( Kongapperuvali )°, the big road 
to Pennadam 10 , the Taiijdvurp-peruvali mentioned in 
an inscription from Aduturai 11 , and, most significant 
of all, the great road leading to Kalyanapuram men- 
tioned in an inscription from the Tanj ore district 12 . 
The breadth of one of these roads is stated to have 
been two rods (kol), about twenty-four feet 13 . 

Trade was carried on by merchants banded to- 
gether in powerful guilds and corpora- 
Merchant Guilds, tions. The manigrdmam of Kodum- 

balur endowing a charitable trust 
in Salem 14 , the Yalanjiyar of Tiruppurambiyam 15 , 

*9 of 1898. 

• 811 . Ill, 64. 

*281 Of 1911. 

‘•233 Of 1915. 

“363 of 1907. 

“203 Of 1908. 

'• 811 . ill, 16, I. 2. 

“47 of 1888. 

“71 Of 1897. 

K — W 



418 


THE COJAS 


are examples of such associations. There were 
also the Teliki of Bezwada mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions of Rajaraja II 16 ; the saiyavdcakas (truth- 
tellers), also called dhanma-vaniyar (the just 
merchants) who maintained a matha called after 
themselves and supplied the tiruk-kodi (the holy flag) 
at the three annual festivals at Tiruvannamalai 17 ; the 
sucakar karundkara vtrar or the valanjiyar of 
Tennilangai who paid contributions from 1189 for the 
maintenance of a Vaisnava matha at Tirukanna- 

« i * • • 

puram 18 ; and the valanjiyar of Tinnevelly who had 
the kdrdnmai of the lands of the local temple, on 
condition that they provided for certain specified 
requirements for the services in the temple. About 
1207 A.D. the merchant communities of Nellur, 
Narayanapuram, Arkadu, Mayilappur, Tiravorrivur, 
Pundamali, Nedumpirai, Damanakacceri, Perungalur 
and Tiruniru cooperated together in acquiring a whole 
village and giving it as devaddna to the temple of 
Tiruppasur, for constructing a madil, an enclosing 
wall ; the village was left by the merchants in charge of 
Tammu Siddhi 20 . Again, an inscription of 1235 from 
Anbil mentions an assemblage of the Cittira-melip- 
periya ndttd/r, the tisai-dyirattu ainnurruvar, the 
iSettis of the nadus in many mandalas, damnac-cettis, 
Jayapdlas, munai-vlra-kodiyar, the excellent silpis , 

*•189, 192 of 1897. 

>'547 of 1902; 550 of 1902. 

>•505 of 1922. 

>•28 of 1927. 

••120 of 1980. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


419 


and the mudar-padai-kalanaiyar ; the assembly des- 
cribed themselves by the phrase JRdjardjap-peru- 
niraviyom; the object of the meeting is unfortunately 
not clear, for the inscription is damaged. 21 Lastly, 

the valanjlyar and the ndnddesiyat-tisai-dyirattain- 
nurruvar built a part of the temple at Tiruvilakkudi 22 . 


Nanadesa-Tisaiyayirattu Ainnurruvar, formed 
x ,_ the most celebrated of these guilds. 

This long name is susceptible of 
two interpretations; the Five Hundred of the 
thousand directions in all countries, or the One 
Thousand and Five Hundred from all countries and 


directions. Seeing, however, that, the guild is des- 
cribed sometimes by the terms minadesis or 
ainnurruvar, the first interpretation seems to be the 
better of the two. This guild had a long and notable 
record of achievement. Its importance may be taken 
to antedate the rise of the Imperial Colas of the 
Vijayalaya line; for two short inscriptions from 
Munisandai in the Pudukkottah state, most probably 
of the time of Vijayalaya and Parantaka I, show that 
this corporation was already well established, the tank 
at Munisandai being called after it; the inscriptions 
record endowments for the periodical repair of 
the tank. 22 * Members of this corporation obtained 
some houses assigned to them about A. T>. 1015 by 
the sabhd of Nigarili-sola-caturvedimangalam for 


“'601 of 1902. 

*“131 of 1926. 

**• Tijdschrift voor Ind. Tml — •, Land — en Volkenkunde , Deel, lxxiv, 
1934, pp. 614-8, where S. R. Balasubrahmaniam draws attention to these 
records. 



420 


THE CO^AS 


being used as residences or warehouses 28 . In A. D. 
1033 is recorded a gift of land for a service in a Siva 
temple at Ambasamudram for the benefit ( sirappti ) of 
the same guild 24 . 

The fragmentary Tamil inscription from Loboe 
Toewa, in Sumatra, mentions this body of merchants 
and bears the date Saka 1010 (A.D. 1088), clear proof 

of the active share of the guild in the extensive over- 
seas trade of the time. Some inscriptions from the 
Mysore area 25 furnish important and interesting 
details of the myths relating to the origin and organisa- 
tion of the guild, the articles of merchandise in which 
its members carried on trade, the countries with which 
they traded, and the means of transport employed by 
them. Bom of the race of Vasudeva, Kandali and 
Mulabhadra, they were favoured by the goddess 
Bhagavati, and comprised many subdivisions, bom to 
wanderers over many countries. They visited ‘the 
Cera, Cola, Pandya, Maleya, Magadha, Kausala, 
Saurastra, Dhanusjra, Kurumba, Kambhoja, Lala, 
Baruvara, Nepala, Ekapada, Lambakarna, Stri-Rajya, 
Ghoja-mukha, and many other countries, ’ and by land 
routes and water routes they penetrated into the 
regions of the six continents. Their trade was in 
superior elephants, well-bred horses, precious stones 
of all sorts, spices, perfumes and drugs. They sold 
them wholesale or hawked them about on their 
shoulders. They often carried their merchandise on 

*•651 of 1916. ; 

**82 of 1907. 

lv, Hg. 17, vii, Sk. ll$. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


421 


the backs of asses and buffaloes ‘adorned with red 
trappings.’ They were famous for their ‘five 
Hundred vlra-sasanas. * One such vlrarsasana is 
found recorded in an inscription 26 of the l’eign of 
Rajadhiraja I, dated in his thirty-second year c. 
A. D. 1050. By a resolution of their body, the 
nanadesis and their followers resolved to convert the 
village of Slravalli into a imnddeslya-dasamadi-eri- 
virappattina and to confer certain privileges on its 
residents. The record also describes the merchant 
guild as a samaya and states that it was served by 
( samayalta tiruvadikkup-pani seyyuin ) regiments of 
foot-soldiers and swordsmen. There was another 
meeting at Mylapore of the same body of merchants 
which decided to convert Kattur, originally an 
Ayyapulal, into a virapattina, a status which implied a 
privileged position in the country’s trade 27 . Again 
in 1199 a meeting of the nadu and nagaram of 
fj ttattur (Trichinopoly district) granted the village 
of Venmanip-padi, converting it into a mercantile 
town called Tayilu-nalla-puram 28 . 

The nanadesis then were a powerful and 
‘autonomous corporation of merchants whose activities 
apparently took little or no account of political 
boundaries. They visited all countries in the course 
of their trade, and everywhere they enjoyed a res- 
pected and privileged position. In the C51a kingdom 
they received recognition alike from the central 

9fl 342 of 1912. Another eri-vira-pattina was Muttukura in the same 
neighbourhood (321 of 1912) . 

* T 256 of 1912. The part of the inscription recording those privileges 
Is very obscure in its language* 

*•521 of 1912. 



4 22 THE CO^AS 

V 

government and from local agencies like the village 
sabhas. They had their own mercenary army, doubt- 
less for the protection of the merchandise in their 
warehouses and in transit. They also concerned 
themselves in the details of local administration in 
the places where they were settled. In Malurpatna 
they undertook to cooperate with the Sri-Vaisnavas in 
enforcing the regular collection of the interest due to 
the temple on a perpetual loan from the members of 
the sabha of Vandur, also called iSola-madevi-catur- 
vedimangalam. This Avas early in the reign of 
Rajendra I 29 . Their success and prosperity were to 
some extent independent of the vicissitudes of war and 
peace among the states in which they carried on trade. 
In the thirteenth century, there Avas at Pagan in 
Burma a Visnu temple built by the nunadesis and 
gifts Avere made to it by a merchant from one of the 
port towns on the Malabar coast 30 . 

A recent writer has pointed out the differences 

between mercantile organisations in 
Merchant guilds Europe and in the East 31 . Speaking 

ln the la stote. t0 of European trade with China, lie 

contrasts the radical weakness of the 

Chinese commercial class as compared with the 
European. ‘ The great chartered companies of Europe 
had monopoly rights and state backing; they sinned 
against the light of free trade no less than the Chinese 
guilds, but they stood for the self -organisation and 

*•612 ot 1911. 

"El, vil, pp. 197*8. 

^Hudson — Europe and China, p« 265* 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE. 


423 


autonomy of the merchant class, not the mere rapacity 
of government officials. In China the merchant was 
powerless against officialdom ; politically he was 
nothing ; there was no tradition of city-state 
commercialism to teach him his potential strength. In 
Europe the botirgeois was rising to be master of the 
state; in China he was but the servile agent of the 
mandarins.’ In South India, the merchants had 
certainly more freedom and scope for initiative, and 
a better capacity for voluntary organisation than in 
China; they were less at the mercy of government 
officials, and exercised a great deal of autonomy in the 
regulation of their affairs. The state was not eager 
to interfere in their transactions, and would not do 
so except on invitation- On the other hand, the state 
did not, it could not, give the strong backing to its 
merchants engaged in foreign trade that the European 
state provided. Neither the merchants nor the state 
in South India had any idea of the possibilities of 
economic imperialism. Trade to them was an end in 
itself; they were willing to carry on trade if conditions 
were favourable ; it never occurred to them that 
foreign lands may be compelled to buy and sell at 
the point of the bayonet. 

4 

[ There were also local organisations of merchants 

called nagaram in big centres of trade 
r ^ m ' like Kanclpuram and Mamallapuram 88 . 
What the relation was between these local bodies of 
traders and the more general groups like the 
Manigramam and the Nanadesis or Valanjiyar cannot 

••SIT. ill, Museum plates of Uttama C0}a and 171 of 1894. 



424 


THE COLAS 


be determined with precision. That Brahmins also 
occasionally engaged in trade becomes clear from a 
direct mention of the Brahmins who engaged in trade 
along with the Vajanjiyar in the South bazaar of 
Ennajdram 33 , )a large centre of Yaisnavism and 
education, in the modem district of South Arcot. The 
nagarams used to raise voluntary contributions from 
their members for specific purposes. To give just one 
example: in A.D. 1037, the nagaram of the town of 
Valaiyur 31 resolved that the lamps to be maintained 
by them in the local temple and the interest due from 
them on moneys borrowed from the temple were to be 
met from the proceeds of a regular payment in future 
of certain dues laid on their commercial transactions 


in accordance with a schedule, — the buyer and seller 
each giving a kal-alaviipdltam of one vfrii per kalam 
(on grains), a kol-kiiU (weighment-cess) of one pal am 
per nirai, ten betel-nuts for every thousand exchanged 
and so on. Many other instances can be traced in the 
inscriptions of a similar exercise of the privileges of 
autonomy in the regulation of the internal affairs of 
the groups. 


On customs and octroi duties in this 

period we have little direct evidence. 
Kulottunga I is celebrated in contem- 


Sungam. 


porary literature and epigraphy for abolishing the 
sungam. We seem to have no detailed account of this 
most important transaction of the reign, and there is 
no means of knowing how this was managed, and 


»*S4S of 1917 . 
•‘82 of 1906. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


425 


what steps, if any, were taken to fill the gap in 
the revenues of the government caused by the remis- 
sion. (The word sungam is explained generally as 
including all the imposts on articles of merchandise 
imported in ships and carts, that is to say, from across 
the seas or the interior 39 . ) 

The “I. O. U.” as an instrument of borrowing was 

pro-note. apparently in common use. It, is 

mentioned quite casually in an inscrip- 
tion from Tiruvaduturai of the reign of Rajaraja I 38 . 
The sabhd of that place owed some money to a Kaikkola 
which they had borrowed from him on a pro-note 
(Jiaiyeluttolai) . For some reasons not recorded, the 
entire property of the Kaikkolan became rdjasvam, 
that is, it was confiscated by the king who naturally 
sought thereupon to realise the money due from the 
sabha. These facts are recorded in explanation of the 
assignment to the temple of some of the village lands 
in lieu of the money then borrowed by the sabhd for 
paying off the king. Another instance of borrowing on 
a pro-note is the loan of 100 has ns from a temple in 
Punjai to the mula-parudai of Talaiccangadu men- 
tioned in an inscription of the reign of Rajendra I 37 . 


Wide divergences are traceable in the rate of 

interest on loans, and also in the 
interest rate . manner in which the rate is expressed 

and calculated. The rate of 12£% 
per annum, of £ kalanju per kalahju of gold, was for 


•"ParimSlaJagar on JT«ya?, 756; ante pp. 60-1. 
••106 of 1925. 

”187 of 1926. 


K— 54 



426 


THE COjiAS 


long the standard rate on the investment of religious 
endowments 88 , though 15 per cent or 3 manjadis per 
kdlanju 89 also obtained in many instances. The 
lowest rate met with is 5 per cent or one manjudi per 
kdlanju, though this rate is coupled with the reign of 
Vijaya Kamapavarman, and not a Cola king. 40 Higher 
rates of money interest are also found though not so 
frequently as the normal 12| or 15 per cent. Thus we 
have rates like 12 J per cent per half-year (pu) working 
to 25 per cent per annum 41 ; four hundred kalanjns 
yielding one hundred and fifty per annum, 37£ per 
cent' 2 ; or even a 50 percent rate expressed as half k(lsu 
per annum per kasu 43 . These rates cannot be 
explained easily at present ; it is certain, however 
that they are not due to differences either in the 
purpose of the loan or investment or in the political 
conditions affecting social security. The Rastrakuta 
invasion made little difference in the prevailing rate of 
interest as can be seen from inscriptions quoting 
Krsna’s regnal years 44 ; the higher and the lower 
rates of interest alike prevail in the reign of 
Rajendra I, when there was little or no disturbance to 
internal security. Very often the rate of interest is ex- 
pressed in terms of commodities and sometimes even 

"SII. ii, Intr. p. 17, 255 of 1921; 8 of 1897—grain rate. 147 of 1906 
gives the rate § kMu per k&4u; 1 of 1893 gives 4 tiramam per kdiu per 
month. 

*®75 of 1898; 164, 169, 172, 179 of 1912; 176 of 1916; 216 of 1921. 
19 of 1907 calls the rate dharmap-politai. 

"SII. iii, 128 — 11. 86-7. 

4, 16 of 1899. 57 of 1928 gives the rate 10 kd$tis on 40; also 518 of 
1920. 

4 *203 of 1925. 

4*193 of 1925. 281 of 1910 also gives a 50% rate. 

**179 Of 1912. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


4 27 


the principal of the loan is also a given quantity 
of some commodity, usually grain. The divergences 
in the commodity-rates are quite as wide and as 
unaccountable as in money-rates. The lowest grain- 
rate of interest per kdlanju of gold is one kalam per 
annum 45 ; the highest rate goes up to 3 kalams 46 , and 
even four 47 ; the more common rate is in the neighbour- 
hood of a kalam , or a kalam and third. In one and 
the same region and at the same time, two village 
assemblies are seen borrowing from one creditor, a 
temple, at the different rates of § kalam and one 
kalam per kalanju per annum 48 . Generally high rates 
of interest, seldom less than 25 per cent, are quoted 
when the principal is expressed in terms of grain 49 , 
and in one case there occurs the impossibly high rate 
of 75 per cent per annum 50 . Another way in which 
different rates of interest find expression is by means 
of the adoption of different rates of capitalisation 
for purposes of endowments of the same service ; thus 
the supply of a quarter measure of oil every day is 
provided for by the endowment of 18 kalanjus , 3 
manjddis and 1 kunri of gold in one instance, and by 
that of just 30 kalanjus in another 51 . 

That there must have been a great amount of 
borrowing and lending among traders and merchants 
in the normal course of their business we may take 

4 *316 of 1903. 

44 58 of 1897. 

4 ’90 of 1928. 

4S Museum Plates, 11. 28-34. 

4 *30 kalams per 100 called dh(trinap-poli$al in 506 of 1920. 

**232 of 1923. 

*’£21, I, 84 and 67 of 1895, 



428 


THE CO^AS 


for granted; but of such transactions no record seeitis 
to have survived. Almost all the investments recorded 
in the inscriptions are of charitable funds generally 
ear-marked for specific, purposes, and sometimes a 
certain stability is imparted to these purposes by the 
investments and the terms governing them being made 
irrevocable. Thus a merchant from Malai-nadu 

t 

invested 16f kalanjus of gold in a vadakkadasn, 
permanent loan, from the interest whereof twelve 
Brahmins were to be fed for one month ( Kumbha ) 
every year in the temple of Yarahadeva at 
Tiruvadandai (C’hingleput) 32 . Again the dr of 
Koneri accepted a loan of five k a lan jus from 
a temple in Kancipuram subject to the conditions 
that they should pay interest at If kalams per kalanju 
per annum and that they should at no time offer to 
return the principal of the loan. 03 An inscription from 
Malurpatna (Bangalore) of the reign of Rajendra I 
provides another example which is of great interest 
for the sanctions it lays down to enforce conformity 
to the terms of the loan. 54 The grain-principal 

(nellu- mudal ) of the perpetual loan was 320 kalams 
and the rate of interest 3f kurunis per kalam per 
annum yielding in all 100 kalams in a year, to be 
remitted in two instalments, 50 kalams at each of the 
two harvests. The borrowers were the members of 
the sabhd of Vandur who agreed to give two meals a 
day to the persons delegated to collect this grain- 
interest; these persons might resort, if necessary, 

**273 of 1910. 

**64 of 1893. 

•‘612 of 1911, (EC. ix, Cp. 129) . 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


429 


to processes of distraint such as stopping the supply of 
water and fire, surrounding the habitation, and im- 
pounding cattle. Nothing is stated in explanation of 
these rather drastic sanctions and we cannot say if 
they ever were actually enforced. The problem of 
modem finance is to fund public debts in order to 
secure stable interest charges ; the problem that 
the temples of South India had to face once was 
that of securing a fixed income as interest on their 
investments, of funding their loans as it were. 

The transfer of immovable property by sale or 

gift was generally attended with more 

Transfer of formalities than that of movables, 
property. r phe ordinary transactions among indi- 
vidual owners are seldom represented 
in the records before us. Only those of public interest 
are found recorded in inscriptions, and an analysis of 
the sales of land so recorded reveals that at least four 
types were distinguished among them. They are : 
(1) ajmkrayam (2) the peruvilai (great sale) of some 
king (named) (3) the peruvilai of Candesvara and 
(4) sabhaivilai or ur-vilai. The first of these was 
sale by djild or royal order of the properties of persons 
found guilty of treason against the king or his family. 
The leading example of this class is the sale recorded 
in the Udaiyargudi inscription 5 * of the properties 
of persons involved in the murder of Aditya II. 
The peruvilai of the kings was the sale of the lands 
of cultivators in the processes of revenue-collection 
when other means of collection had failed. The 

••677 of 1920; also 379 of 1922. 



480 


THE CO^AS 


Candesvara-penivilai was the sale of land by Siva 

temples, Candesvara representing Siva as his adi-dasa, 
first devotee, in such transactions. The corresponding 
term, if any, for describing sales by Visnu temples does 
not seem to appear anywhere. The sabhai- or ur-vilai 
was, as the name implies, the sale of land from the 
common land of the commune effected by the local 
assembly of the village. A careful study of the 
prices mentioned in these different classes of sales 
points to the conclusion that they were often 
governed by extra-economic considerations, and this 
may be the reason why the nature of the sale was 
specifically mentioned in each such case. The rates 
specified had apparently little or no relation to 
the market value of land in the neighbourhood. It 
is probable that in the peruvilai (lit. great sale) 
something like a public auction was the method of sale 
followed, the usual procedure being to cry out the upset 
price in a public place at a time fixed in advance, and 
await the response of those present at the sale. It is 
doubtful if it was a real auction where bidding against 
one another on the part of the buyers was allowed; the 
formula in the inscriptions suggests only the announce- 
ment of a fixed price together with the other terms, 

if any, on which the property was offered, and the 
acceptance by the buyer 66 . 

The main features of the formulae adopted in 
documents, sale or gift deeds, conveying property in 
land may be briefly noted. The minute care with 
which the boundaries were described in each case may 


*•458 of 1905. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


431 


be seen from the copper-plate grants like those of 
Anbil, Anaimangalam and Tiruvalangaclu. The same 
feature marks the stone inscriptions as well, though 
the description is often more summary in form and 
therefore much shorter than in the copper plates. 
Then the phrase ‘mikudik-kurai-idladanga’, ‘including 
excess or shortage/ is invariably employed, and this 
implies that the boundaries rather than the measure- 
ments stated formed the decisive factors. Then there 
occured phrases which excluded other properties like 
old devadanas, canals, roads etc., which were not meant 
to be conveyed. Like gift-deeds, sale-deeds also often 
contained details of the rights inherent in the property 
conveyed. These included the ownership of the sub- 
soil, trees, hills, wells etc., irrigation-rights, easement 
rights and so on. The document usually concluded 
with a declaration that the price agreed upon had been 
fully paid and the land duly conveyed, and that the 
document concerned was to serve as the acquittance 
for the sale price 57 and that no other receipt or acquit- 
tance was to be demanded in the future. One sale 
deed from Arpalckam 58 dated 1232 A.D. contains the 
following provisions: a declaration that the land sold 
was subject to no encumbrance and that if, in future, 
the existence of any encumbrance was discovered, the 
vendor would release the land from it ; the usual clause 
about acquittance for the sale price ; a declaration that 
the purchaser acquired all the rights over the land 
including the rights to sell, mortgage and give away; 

''219 of 1894; 806 Of 1911, 522 of 1922 etc. 

>•137 Of 1923. 



432 


THE CStiAS 


that the vendor was not to raise objections at a later 
stage and plead that the document was void on the 
score of imperfect wording, illegibility of letters and 
so on. An inscription from Tiruvannamalai (1204 
AJ>.) 69 records a resolution of the mahesvaras that 
houses built on sites in the Tirumadai-vilagam (temple 
area) were to be sold at a price to be fixed by a superin- 
tendent (kankani) from the temple treasury, and that 
half the sale proceeds must be remitted to the temples, 
the owner of the house being entitled only to the 
balance. Very often a payment is made in addition to 
the price of land to cover the future taxes and dues 
on the land so that it may be conveyed tax-free : in 
these cases this further payment is also mentioned in 
the documents and the taxes intended to be remitted 
specified in detail. Sometimes the irai-kaval was a 
separate document, that is when the taxes were 
commuted sometime after the purchase of the land. 

From very early times Southern India carried on a 
flourishing commerce with the nations across the seas 
on either side of the peninsula. From the fourth 
century A. D. or thereabout, the Persians, rather than 
the Arabs, were the most venturesome mariners of the 
Indian ocean. In the Chinese annals of the fifth, 
sixth and early seventh centuries, all the products of 
Ceylon and India, with others from Arabia and 
Africa, are classed as “products of Persia” 60 . The 
direct sea-route between China and India is, however, 
known to have come into common use by the close of 
the seventh century, and I-tsing mentions no fewer 

**486 of 1902. 

•*Chau Ju-kua, pp. 7-8. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


433 


than thirty-seven Chinese pilgrims who took this 
route to India in his time 61 . At no time had Indian 
merchantmen ever ceased to frequent the shores of 
the Malay peninsula and the islands of the archipelago, 
even Indo-ehina and China. rMahabalipuram, Kaviri- 
ppumpattinam, Saliyur and Korkai on the east coast, 
and Quilon on the West were great emporiums fre- 
quented by the traders of other countries^) Ceylon and 
the Nicobars in the East, the Laccadives and the 
Maldives in the West furnished good halting places 
for ships bound on long voyages. 


Towards the ninth century A.D. the countries of 
Southern Asia had developed an extensive maritime 
and commercial activity, and had attained a prosperity 
unequalled in history 62 . The Tang empire in China, 
Sr! Vijaya under the powerful line of the Sailendras, 


The Persian 
Gulf. 


and the Abbasid Khalifat at Baghdad 
were the chief states outside India that 
flourished on this trade. The political 
troubles in China in the latter part of 
the ninth century interrupted the established trade 
relations for a time. China became unsafe for the 
foreign traders who now retired to the Malay Peninsula 
and Sumatra, whither the Chinese ships had to go for 
the purchase of foreign goods. This was the 
beginning of the Chinese navigation of the high seas. 
In the twelfth century, Cantonese sea-going junks 
went as far west as Quilon on the Malabar Coast . 63 


•Hbid., p. 9, n. 1. 

•a Per rand — Voyage, pp. 14-15. 
«*Chau Ju-kua, p, 18. 

K— 55 



4S4 


THE CO^AS 


Siraf on the eastern coast of the Persian Gulf 64 was 
the chief emporium in the West in this period- 
“Here”, says Ibn Hawqal, a contemporary Arab 
writer, “there is not any husbandry or cultivation of 
the ground; and they bring water from a distance. 
There are not any trees immediately about Siraf ; and 
the inhabitants devote their whole time to commerce 
and merchandise” 65 . Such was the importance of the 
trade of Siraf, that, despite the disadvantages of its 
situation and climate, the town was covered with very 
fine edifices and was very populous. The sailors and 
merchants of the entire Indian ocean, Chinese, 
Javanese, Malay and Indian, came frequently to Siraf 
for exchanging their products. Siraf then was a 
cosmopolitan city, and its chief merchants, when they 
received strangers as guests, took scrupulous care to 
conform to their manners and customs. After 
mentioning the existence in India of a caste of which 
the members never ate off the same plate or at the same 
table, Abu Zaid tells us : “ when these sectaries 
resort to Siraf and one of the principal merchants 
invites them to a repast in his house, at which about 
100 persons assist, it is necessary that the host causes 
to be placed before each one of these sectaries a plate 
in which he eats and which is exclusively reserved for 
him” 66 . The use of separate plates for eating was, of 
course, not confined to any single caste or sect, as Abu 
Zaid thought, but was the universal rale in India. 
The statement is valuable as evidence of the trade and 

•‘The modern Tahiri, 27* 38'. N., 62* 20' E. 

••Wilson — The Persian Gulf, p. 94. 

• •Ferrand — Voyage, p* 138. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE ' 


435 


social relations maintained by Indians with the rest 
of the world in the ninth and tenth centuries. 

At the end of the tenth century, the political 

situation in China had become normal 

_ — ' again, and the Sung government of the 

day evinced a great interest in the foreign trade of the 
country. The trade was made a government monopoly, 
and strenuous efforts were made to increase its volume. 
CA mission was sent abroad by the emperor with 
credentials under the imperial seal and provisions of 
gold and piece-goods to induce ‘the foreign traders of 
the South Sea and those who went to foreign lands 
beyond the sea to trade’ to come to China. Special 
licenses to import goods were promised them” 67 . How 
eager the Colas were to take advantage of the extended 
opportunities thus opened to them is evident from the 
missions sent to China by Rajaraja and Rajendra^ 
The great distance between the Cola country and 
China, and the novelty of the direct connection now 
started, prevented the proud Chinese government 
from giving adequate recognition to the position and 
importance attained by the Colas. Their envoys took 
with them very valuable presents, but they were only 
ranked with those of a vassal state in Eastern 
Turkestan 68 . The Cola embassy which reached China 
in 1015 after spending over three years on the way 
must have left the Cola country towards the close of 
the rule of Rajaraja, Lo-tsa-lo-tsa of the Chinese 
chronicles . Chau J u-Kua says of this embassy : 69 


“Chau Ju-kua, p. 19. 

“Chau Ju-kua, p. 101, ». 11. 
•*p. 96. 



436 


THE COpAS 


“In former times they did not send tribute to our 
court, but ‘in the eighth year of the ta-chimg and 
siang-fu periods (A.D. 1015), its (of Chu-lien) sove- 
reign sent a mission with pearls and like articles as 
tribute. The interpreters, in translating their speech, 
said they wished to evince the respect of a distant 
nation for (Chinese) civilisation. ’ They were ordered 
•by Imperial Decree to remain in waiting at the side 
gate of the Palace, and to be entertained at a banquet 
by the Associates in the College of Court Annalists. 
By Imperial favour they were ranked with the envoys 
of Iviu-tz’i. It happened to be the Emperor’s birth- 
day, and the envoys had a fine opportunity to witness 


the congratulations in the Sacred Enclosure.” Fewer 


details have survived of the other embassy from 
Shi-(lo)-lo-cha yin-to-lo ehu-lo (SrI-raja Indra Cola) 


which reached China in A. D. 1033. The trade thus 


started with China appears to have been carried on 

without interruption in the eleventh century, and in the 

language of the Annalists of the Celestial court, the 

Cola kings continued to send ‘tribute’ to that court. 

The naval expedition of Raj end r a against Sri Yijaya 

# 

and the success achieved by that expedition rendered 


communication with the ‘Southern seas’ and the 


empire of China more easy and regular than it was 
ever before. The appeal to Vlrarajendra for help in 
the settlement of the political affairs of Kadaram 
confirms our view of the relations between the Co]as 
and the kingdoms of the east. Another Cola embassy 
to China of the year 1077 is also mentioned and the 


name of the contemporary Cola king, Kulottunga I, 
is given in a corrupt form in the Sung annals 70 . 


T0 Chau Ju-kua, p. 100. Ante p. 25. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


437 


The chief articles of merchandise that entered 
into this long distance trade were necessarily goods 

that carried great value for small bulk. 

Ar Trade.° f Of Siraf, the Arab writer, Istakhri 

(tenth century) says 71 : “The imports 
are aloes wood (for burning), amber, camphor, 
precious gems, bamboos, ivory, ebony, paper, sandal- 
wood, and all kinds of Indian perfumes, drugs and 
condiments. In the town itself excellent napkins are 
made, also linen veils, and it was a great market for 
pearls.” From the middle of the eleventh century 
Siraf began to decline in importance, and the island 
of Qais or Kish began to take its place as the entrepot 
of Indian trade. The Jewish traveller from Spain, 
Benjamin of Tudela, relates that about the middle of. 
the twelfth century A. I)., the island of Jvisli marked 
the limit of the voyages of Indian merchants trading 
with Persia and the West. “Kish”, he says 72 , “is a 
considerable market, being the point to which Indian 
merchants and those of the islands bring their commo- 
dities; while the traders of Mesopotamia, Yemen and 
Persia import all sorts of silk and purple cloths, flax, 
cotton, hemp, mash (a kind of pea), wheat, barley, 
millet, rye and all other sorts of comestibles and pulse, 
which articles form objects of exchange; those from 
India import, great quantities of spices, and the 
inhabitants of the island live by what they gain in their 
capacity of brokers of both parties. The island 
contains about five hundred Jews.” 

T1 Wilson — The Persian Gulf , p. 94. 

”R. H. Major : India in. the Fifteenth Century , Intrn. pp. xlv — 1. 
Also Wilson, op. c it. pp. 98-9, 



438 


THE CdfeAS 


Horse trade. 


The rise into importance of the Arab trade in 
horses which flourished • for many centuries on a 

large scale must be traced to the period 
of the growth and expansion of Cola 
dominion in Southern India. The important role of 
cavalry in the Cola army and the armies of other 
powers opposed to them is clearly brought out by the 
inscriptions. There are also frequent references in 
them to kudiraic-cettis 73 , dealers in horses, who no 
doubt imported horses from abroad, particularly 
Arabia and perhaps Pegu, and distributed them among 
the princes and nobles in the land. As these Cettis 
are often said to come from mcUai-nadu 7i , it is reason- 
able to infer that Arabia supplied the bulk of the 
horses imported into South India. The extensive 
trade described by Marco Polo and Wassaf in the 
beginning of the fourteenth century could not have 
sprung up suddenly, and its beginnings must be traced 
to Cola times if not to an earlier period- 

“The imports into China in this trade”, says 
Rockhill 75 , “consisted of two distinct categories of 
goods, the one manufactured textile fabrics (mostly of 

cotton), spices and drugs, and the other, and by far the 
most valuable intrinsically, jewels and semi-precious 

substances, such as ivory, rhinoceros’ 
horn, ebony, amber, coral and the like, 
and various aromatic products and 


Chinese 

imports. 


"556 of 1904. The import of war-horses may have begun earlier 
under the Kadambas and the Pallavas. The reference in Pallav&$v<t* 
samsthena kalahena of the T&lgunda inscription of K&kusthav&rman 
(EL viii, p. 32 1. 4) and some ancient sculptures may he recalled in 
this connection. Also Paftinapp&lai, 1. 185. 

"196 of 1928; 182 of 1926. 

™T'<mng Pao , xv, P. 419. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


439 


perfumes, used either in the preparation of incense or 
for perfuming the body.” The high value of the 
second category of goods and the increasing demand 
for them led the Chinese government to declare their 
sale a government monopoly. Trade in these articles 
was open only to licensed vendors who bought theii 
supplies at government warehouses in quantities anc 
at prices fixed by government. Trade in cottor 
fabrics, spices and drugs was under no restrictions, 
and subject only to an import duty payable in kind 
and varying from one-tenth' to two-tenths of the 
goods imported. Besides this import 'duty collected 
at the time of their entering the port, these goods 
had also to bear a fixed tonnage tax on the ship. 
This trade was felt on the whole to be beneficial tc 
China and caused no anxiety to the government. 
In course of time, however, grave abuses developec 
in connection with the trade in luxuries, and the 
drain of currency and precious metals resulting froir 
its expansion was such as to cause the govemmen 
very serious concern. These evils came to ligh 
in the twelfth century, and the Chinese govemmen 
had to embark on legislation calculated to prohibit the 
exportation of precious metals and coined money anc 
to restrict the volume of trade with Ma’bar anc 
Kulum (i.e. the Coromandel coast and Quilon). 

In the face of strong discouragement from the 
Chinese government, the commercial relations betweer 
China and South India appear to have been sustained 
with more or less regularity, to the end of the thirteentl 
century . The Loboe Toewa ( Sumatra ) Tami 



440 


THE CdfeAS 


fragment of §. 1010 (A.D. 1088) which mentions thie 
Tisai-Ayirattainnurruvar shows that the merchants 

of South India had settlements outside India, and it is 
quite possible that small settlements of these traders 
were found in all important entrepots of the Persian 

Gulf and the China sea. Hindu sculptures of 
decidedly South Indian origin have been discovered 
in a Chinese temple in the port-town of Ch’iian-cliou, 
opposite to Formosa; these sculptures represent 
Puranie themes like the Gajondra-moksa and Krsna 
tied to a mortar between trees and so on, and are best 
placed in the twelfth or thirteenth century. It seems 
possible therefore that a colony of South Indian 
merchants had settled in the port-town of Ch’iian-chou, 
which has been identified with the Zayton of the 
mediaeval travellers . 751 

The list of the products of the Cola country 
given by Chau Ju-Kua shows that the list of articles 
imported by China from there remained practically 
unchanged at the beginning of the thirteenth 
century. He says : 70 “The native products comprise 
pearls, elephants’ tusks, coral, transparent glass, 
betelnuts, cardamoms, opaque glass, cotton stuffs with 
coloured silk threads, and cotton stuffs.” The same 

author notes also that the taxes and imposts of the Cola 
kingdom were numerous and heavy and that conse- 
quently traders rarely went there; the criticism is 
obviously based on a general comparison with Chinese 
customs duties and should not be pressed far; for we 

**• 0$ta*iati»che Zeitschrift (1933), pp. 5-11. 

"p. 36. 



INDUSTRY AND TRADE 


441 


have much other evidence on the flourishing condition 
of the foreign trade of South India and on the presence 
of small settlements of foreign merchants in port- 
towns. There are in existence accounts of several 
exchanges of missions between South India and the 
Mongol emperor Kublai Khan, all of which followed 
the sea-route and were partly commercial and partly 
diplomatic in character, but as these relate almost 
exclusively to the period of Pandyan ascendancy and 
have little direct connection with the Cola kingdom, 
they need not be detailed here. For the same reason, 
the account of Ma ’bar given by Marco Polo, very 
interesting and important in itself, deserves only a 
passing mention in a study of Cola history. 

Benjamin of Tudela states that Cliulam was seven- 
teen days by sea from Kish ; Chulam may therefore be 
Quilon or some other port more to the north on the 
West coast of India and probably subject to Cola rule. 
Of the people of this place, their government and 
country, Benjamin observes : 77 “They are descendants 
of Khush, are addicted to astrology and are all black. 
This nation is very trustworthy in matters of trade, 
and whenever foreign merchants enter their port, three 
secretaries of the king immediately repair on board the 
vessels, write down their names and report them to 
him j the king thereupon grants them security for their 
property, which they may even leave in the open fields, 
without any guard. One of the king’s officers sits in 
the market, and receives goods that may have been 

"R. H. Major, ma. 

K— 56 



442 


THE Cd^AS 


found anywhere, and which he returns to those appli- 
cants who can minutely describe them. This custom is 
observed in the whole empire of the king.” Regarding 
the hours of business, Benjamin also says : “ From 
Easter to new year (from April to October) , during 
the whole of the summer the heat is extreme. From the 
third hour of the day (nine o’clock in the morning) 
people shut' themselves up in their houses until the 

evening at which time everybody goes out. The streets 
and markets are lighted up and the inhabitants employ 

all the night upon their business which they are pre- 
vented from doing in the day time, in consequence of 
expessive heat.” 

( There is perhaps no better evidence of the partial 
nature of our Indian sources than our being thrown 
almost exclusively on Arab and Chinese sources for 
our knowledge of this most important aspect of 
national life, viz. the foreign trade of the Cola empire. 



Chapter XXIII 

COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 

The absence of prominent land-marks in the 
numismatic history of Southern India, and the small 
proportion of inscribed specimens of coins discovered 
so far have stood in the way of a scientific treatment 
of the coinage of the South. At the same time the 
relative richness of epigraphical material has contri- 
buted to make the study of South Indian history 
largely independent of the always difficult and none 
too certain conclusions of numismatics. 

Two weight systems are traceable from the 

ancient coins of the South. ‘The gold 

standards. gadydna coin of the Deccan averages 

58 grains, the heaviest reaching 
60- 1 grains ’ ; this was the standard unit called 
gadydna or kalanju in the Tamil country 1 . If the 
weight of the lost gold coin of Uttama Colan figured 
by Elliot 2 is correctly recorded as 50 to 60 grains, this 
coin must have followed the old gadydna, standard and 
must have remained in circulation late in the tenth 
century. The survival to late times of a small cess 
called Kumarakaccdnam? may be accepted as confirma- 
tion of the same fact. But in the Cola period the more 
usual standard was the kalanju of twenty maMjddis 
equal in theory to 72 grains, but sometimes going 

*Codrington — Ceylon Coins and Currency, PP. 6-7. 

*CSI. No. 151. 

•TAS . f, p. 165; 182 of 1915. 



4 44 


THE Gd(iAS 


up to 80*. It is apparently this unit of bullion weight 
that is employed in an inscription of the thirtieth year 
of Parantaka I which equates the kalanju with the 
niska (Sanskrit) 5 . When exactly the Cdla currency 
was brought into line with this weight standard does 
not admit of precise determination. 


By the side of several inscriptions which seem to 

employ the kalanju in recording pay- 
Pon; mtyai. ments by weight, there are some which 

mention the pon and equate it to the 
kalanju, implying thereby that the pon was coined 
gold of the full weight, of one kalanju G . This coin was 
also called madhurantakadcvayi-madai, served as the 
standard of fineness for testing gold 7 , and yielded the 
same interest as one kalanju of fine gold. This coin 
is mentioned in the thirty-first year of Rajarajadeva 8 , 
and if this king was Rajaraja I, as seems likely, its 
issue must have been commenced under his predecessor 
Madhurantaka Uttama Cola. 

Exactly half of this mudai was tile Rajarajan 

kfwi", issued apparently by Rajaraja I. 

KaSu. J3 u t the kdiu of this >veight and fine- 
ness was certainly in use earlier than the time of 
Rajaraja I. A record 10 of the fourth year of 
Aditya II mentions that twenty kdsus were equal to 


‘Codiington, pp. 3 and 7. 

*»S7/. til, 104; also 181 of 1912. 

•49 of 1888, 54 of 1893, etc. <xmtra Codrlngton; — ‘The early mediaeval 
pon seems to be a ka]aHjn of gold, and not necessarily a coin’, (p. 52). 

’140 Of 1912; ARB. 1913, 11, 22. 

•252 Of 1915. 

•141 of 1912. Mentioned also In 484 of 1925, A.D. 1054. 

••241 of 1923. 



COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


445 


ten kalanjus. It was in vogue after Rajaraja also, 
as the same relation between the kdsu and kalmju 
reappears in some of the later inscriptions 11 . In fact 
both the madai and the kdsu, the standard gold coins 
of the realm, were issued by each one of the Cola kings 
of the period before 1070— the different issues being 
distinguished in epigraphy by the names of the kings 
being prefixed to those of the coins in question: 
thus we have expressions like the madai of Rajaraja 12 , 
the madai of Rajendrasolan 13 , — a phrase which by the 
way makes it more likely that the madhurdntakadevan- 
mddai was issued by Rajaraja’s predecessor, 
anrdda-narkdsu meaning ‘good current kdsu’, and 
palangdsu (‘old kdsu’) 11 and sometimes even anradu- 
( i i ar ) -palangds it$ • current (good) old ku-su, in later 
inscriptions 15 . 

The madhurantakau madai was still current in 
the reign of Kulottunga l ui ; and it is said to have been 
equivalent to the kalanjii of the fineness of 9£ mdri 
or two kdsus 1 '. Thai ibis high standard was not 
maintained at all times in the actual currency goes 
without saying, and the inscriptions give valuable 
evidence on the extent of the departure from the 
standard at different times and places. 

“203 of 1925; 228 of 1923. 

“104 of 1925. This is i^ed as the standard of fineness in 671 

of 1919 . 

“203 of 1925. 

“629 of 1916; 484 of 1925. 

“71 of 1926; 217 Of 1901; 329 of 1929. 

“17 of 1893 ; 180 of 1911. 

“90 of 1928. 



446 


THE CdLAS 


From the reign of Kulottunga I, several other 

types of madais make their appearance 
Local issues. in the inscriptions, and these were 

undoubtedly issued by local rulers who 
were feudatories of the Cola empire. Examples of 
such issues are: the jciyamada mentioned in a record 
from Cebrolu dated ►§. 998 18 ; the uttama-gand^irmdda 
of a Bapatla inscription 19 ; the camara- , tndda and the 
biruda-mada in somewhat later records from the same 
place 20 ; the nakki-nmda mentioned in an inscription 
from Kancipuram, dated in the fourteenth year of 
Rajadhiraja II 21 , and recording a gift from a 
chieftain from Ganga-mandalam, who had the title 
Bhujabalaviran; the Bhujabala-madai, first mentioned 
in an inscription of the third year of Kulottunga, 
perhaps the third of that name, from Nandalur 22 , and 
in later records from Kancipuram and Tiruppalai- 
vanam 23 ; the palpm-pulU-mudai of a record from 
Tinunullaivayil dated 1232 24 ; and the gandagopalan- 
mddai obviously issued by the Telugu-Coda chieftains 
of Nellore who were contemporary with Rajaraja III 
and Rajendra III 25 . 

By a dexterous use of two inscriptions of the same 
time and locality, Codrington seeks to establish that 
the fineness of the madJiurdntakan-mudai was roughly 

•*151 of 1897. 

*'286 of 1897. 

*•210 of 1897; 176 of 1897. 

*•48 of 1893. 

“586 of 1907. 

“360 of 1919, 311 of 1929. ARE. 1929, II, 38. 

“674 of 1904. 

**266 of 1921, and several others. 



COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


447 


about 8§ mattu 26 ; but this contradicts the express 
statement of the inscription of Kulottunga’s reign 
cited above, and it is not improbable that two different 
kdsus are meant by the two records though they stand 

so close to each other, and that the standard of fineness 

% 

adopted in both cases was the same, in other words, 
that sembon of one of these records was of the same 
fineness as the madhurantakan madai, of 9| mattu. 
Codrington adds: “Now none of the Cola coins even 
approach this standard, and it seems possible that this 
madai was a unit of account equal to a kdlanju of gold 
of the touch mentioned, and had ceased to have any 
connection with the progressively debased coinage.” 
This conclusion can hardly be accepted as correct, 
if it implies that the kasu of proper fineness 
was not actually issued from the royal mints for 
circulation. Considering that as late as the thirty-fifth 
year of Rajadhiraja I 27 , A.D. 1053, the standard 
kasu was still current and that a heavier kasu, equal 
to | kalanjti and 3 maiijddis, is sometimes mentioned 

in the records, 28 while a lighter kasu of seven manjadis 
was also known 29 , the real explanation for the preva- 
lence of different units of currency must be sought 
elsewhere. As Codrington has himself observed ‘it 
seems probable that each province of the empire retain- 
ed its local currency’ and its relation to the standard 
currency was a matter for calculation on each separate 

"op, eft, p. 86. 

”228 of 1923. 

*•105 of 1925; also 571 of 1904 for a k&6u of slightly less value. Both 
of R&jar&ja I. 

**5 of 1890. 



443 


THE CSLAS 


occasion. That no coins of the high standard of fine- 
ness of the madai have reached us is perhaps due to no 
other reason than this, that no old coins that were at all 

fit for the gold-smith ’s brazier had any chance of 
survival through many centuries. 

The standard hit sit, moreover, derived ultimately 
from Ceylon which had a more ancient and continuous 
currency tradition than the Co]a kingdom which came 
up in the ninth and tenth centuries. The Uak-hdsu, 
Ceylon h'ftsit, which was also half-a-fcahiwjte of the 

. ' 30 , was current in the island as 
early as the seventh and eighth centuries; it is also 
mentioned in Cola inscriptions from about. 937 A.D. 
in the reign of Parantaka I 81 . There was close 
contact between Ceylon and the Madura country for 
centuries before Parantaka ’s conquest of Madura, 
and the introduction of this coin into Cola currency 
must have been the result of Parantaka’s invasion 
of Madura and the island of Ceylon 32 . From the 
actual specimens of coins known, the Ceylon type 
‘with a rude human figure standing on the obverse, 
and seated on the reverse ’ and the traditional 
Cola type with the seated tiger, fish and bow 
emblems, both may be seen to have existed 
side by side almost from the beginning, the Ceylon 
type being specially suited for circulation in the 

*®25 and 156 of 1895; also 252 of 1915. Th© word Tlflm cam© to 
mean 'gold* in Tamil; and this sense is known to th© Dlv&karara; but 
I have not come across any early use of the word in this sense. Can it 

be that the meaning was derived from the fact that the Ifak-kteu was a 
gold coin ? 

f, 435 of 1904. 

•*Codrington, pp. 73. * 



COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


449 


Pandyan country where it should have been long 
known before. However that may be, the main thing 
was the adoption of the Ceylon standard, and this took 
place apparently much earlier than the time of 
Rajaraja 33 . 

Besides the gold coins madai and kdsu and others 

of local provenance and uncertain 

Karung5.Su. standard, the inscriptions mention 
* Karunga&u * or * Ilakkarungdsu *, the black kdsu of 
Ceylon 34 . This coin is also apparently traceable to 
Ceylon, where the i mla kaJidpana', a silver coin of the 
gadyana standard in weight, is known to have been in 
circulation from very early times 35 . Some of the impure 
silver coins of the Colas now known may be assigned to 
this series, full-weight or half, as the case may be 36 . 
Copper coins issued by the Colas conforming more to 
the standard of the gadyana than of the kalanju are 
figured by Elliot and other writers. 

In an inscription of the thirty-third year of 
Parantaka I from the Madura district 37 , we are told 

,f Contra Codrington, p. 84. It is perhaps worth noting that the 
so-called Lankegvara type of Rajaraja I ( Desikachari, South Indian 
Coins , p. 183) is not a C6Ja coin, but most probably belongs to the 
Ceylonese Kahdvanu series and that the legend on it is now read as 

‘Sr! Lanka Vibhu*. Codrington, op. cit. p. 54. Unfortunately, Desikachari 
does not give the weight of his specimen of this type. The copper 
'KQdanfyartima' coins (Desikachari, p. 66) are also clearly P&pdyan, not 
C5Ja. 

14 SII . iii, 120; 242 of 1907; 238 and 266 of 1923. 

••Codrington, pp. 13-4. 

••Elliot, No. 152 is full weight; so also Nos. 26 and 27 described by 
Hultzsch at I A. 1896, p. 321 which from the title C51a-nS,r&yaha may now 
be ascribed to R&jaraja who gets the same title in one of the Mysore 
inscriptions. One coin at p. 317 I A. 1896 is half weight, 30 gr. 
Another, in the same place, of 511 grains is near Elliot No. 153 which is 
52*2 grains. 

* T &ri. iii, 106. This k&$u is also mentioned in 435 of 1904, year 30. 

K — 57 



450 


THE C5^AS 


that the Tlak-kdiu was the equivalent of 7| new 
akkams. What sort of a coin the akkam was is not 
easily decided. It is again mentioned in a record 88 
of Aditya II, but without any relation to other units- 
In the days of Rajaraja, however, the akkam, was 
definitely a twelfth of the Kasu, s 9 and therefore a 
twenty-fourth of the Kalanju. It is obvious that the 
term akkam is applied to coins of different value in the 
Madura and the Tanjore inscriptions of Parantaka 
and Rajaraja; for there is much support, as we have 
seen, from epigraphy for holding that the Ilak-kdsu 
of Parantaka ’ s time and Rajaraja ’s kdsu were of the 
same value and fineness 40 . 

•*275 of 1923. The Aka was again a fraction piece of the Ceylon 
KahGvaiiuva, and, like the ka$u, may have been derived from there. 

Codringtoo, p. 58. 

"8IL ii, 7. 

40 Codrington has demonstrated conclusively (pages 71-71) that the 
C<Has borrowed their standard from Ceylon where it had a long and 
continuous history before the Coja occupation. The older view that 
'its use was established in Ceylon, as a result of the C6]a occupation of 
the island* (Rapson) is therefore the exact reverse of the truth. See 
also Smith (Catalogue of Coin $ in the Indian Museum) JMC. I, 
pp. 327-f. 

A careful study of the epigraphical evidence, however, does not 
seem to support Codrington's theory of the reform of the coinage by 
Rajar&ja I, (sect. 23# p. 7) which rests so far as 1 am able to 
see on two facts: (a) the mention of palangd&u in 629 of 1916 of the 
27th year of the king and (b) the weight of the lost gold coin (Elliot 
No. 151) with the grantha legend Uttama-Sdjan (pages 7 and 74). These 
facts are susceptible of other explanations, and the fixed relation of 
the Cdja kfi£u=fjlakk&5u:=r} kajafiju is anterior to B&jar&ja’s time as is 
seen from 25 of 1895 of the 24th year of Parfintaka 1, 156 of 1895 and 
241 of 1923, of the time Par&ntaka II (Sundaracd)a) and Aditya II 
respectively. 

The nfigari legends on the C5)a coins seem to appear first under 
R&jaraja I replacing grantha legends of the earlier period, cf. the 
woodcut of the Uttama-C6}a gold coin in CSI. It is not possible to 
decide if tbf & marks a further stage in the growth of Ceylonese influence 
on C6Ja coinage, or, what is equally, if not more, probable, the result 

of North Indian Saiva influences beginning to operate In the C3}a court. 
On the latter hypothesis, the nfigari script must have first been employed 
on the mainland, and thence spread to Ceylon. 



COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


451 


Spread of Cdja 
currency. 


With the growth of the Cola empire as a result 

of the conquests of Rajaraja I, the 
currency system of the Colas was 
extended over the whole empire, inclu- 
ding its feudatory provinces. The new standard was 
adopted for instance in the Yengi country about A.D. 
1000 ; 41 “the weight of liajaraja’s coin is found also 
beyond the limits of his empire, for example, in the 
gold pieces of the Western Calukya Jagadekamalla 
and of the Kadambas of Goa. 42 The ddavalam 
gadyana of the Kongalvas 43 in the eleventh century as 
opposed to gadyana perhaps refers to the Cola re- 
formed gold coin” 44 . On the other hand, the local 
varieties of other areas are found intruding on occa- 
sions into the heart of the Cola empire; about A.D. 
1049, an eastern Calukya prince presented to the 
temple at Tiruvaiyaru a sum of 300 Rajarajamadas 
equal to 337£ kafahjus by the kadinaikal 15 . 


An inscription of the tenth year of Kulottunga 1 

from the Chingleput district gives the 
ra tio between the standard kasu and 
silver bullion by stating that 433 
kalanjus of silver formed the equivalent of 100 
kdsus, so that 1 kalanju of gold, probably of the 
standard fineness of 9£ matt it, was equal to 8.66 
kalanjus of silver 40 . 


•HA. xxv, p. 321. 

•HUC. I, pp. 313-4. 

••EC. I, 49. 

“Codrlngton, p. 8. 

4 *221 of 1894. The C5}a m&#a was just one kalafijn by this feat* 
144 of 1925* 

44 211 of 1922. 



452 


THE CO^AS 


Examples of various types of the gold kdsu 
deviating more or less from the standard have- 
been given already. The gold content of the kdsu 
is clearly stated in several inscriptions, and it 
seems probable that in such statements, the standard 
of fineness adopted was that of the mddai ; 
this is, however, expressly mentioned only in some 
cases. About 1063 A.D., inscriptions from the North 
Arcot district seem to mention two varieties of 


kdsu containing 8 356 and 7 manjadis respectively of 
standard gold 47 ; a kdsu of a little over 6 manjadis 
occurs in an inscription of 1077 from Tiruvorriyur 48 ; 
of 6813 manjadis in a record 1111 A.D. from 
Tiruvaduturai 49 ; and of exactly 6$ manjadis in 1122 
at Tiruvarur 50 . Another inscription from the Tanjore 
district, A.D. 1133, mentions a kdsu of the weight of 
three-fourths of a kalanju 51 , a coin which seems to 
have still kept up the weight of the old mddai of the 
gadydna standard. Even so late as 1152 A.D. a kdsu 
of the gold content of a third of a kalanju is mentioned 
in an inscription from Alangu<fi 61 ‘. 


These coins with a substantial gold content are, 
Debasement. however, excejjtional instances of the 

survival of old issues or very limited 
new issues minted from time to time; for the general 
history of Cola currency seems to have been marked 


‘'157 of 1916; 6 of 1890. 

> “401 of 1896. 

“150 Of 1925. 

. “563 of 1904. 

“609 of 1912; Codrington, op. cit. p. 86. 
“•521 Of 1920. 



COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


453 


by a progressive deterioration. While the ‘Ceylon 
type’ issues of Rajaraja I are usually of fairly good 
gold, all the available specimens of later monarchs 
beginning from Rajadhiraja I are of very base gold, 
‘or rather silver washed with gold.’ 33 

From the time of Kulottunga III, the term kdsu 

eomes to be applied to a copper eoin 
Th© new kaiu. 0 £ ra ther low value and its content 

must have varied greatly from place to place, or, what 
seems equally likely, with each issue. While two to 
three palangdsus were quite enough to endow a lamp 
in this period 53 , 1100 current kdsus were needed for a 
lamp being maintained during services in a temple, 
and 9000 for a perpetual lamp 54 . In another case, 
200 new kdsus sufficed for a lamp 56 . An inscription 
of the twentieth year of Rajendra III states that the 
kalanju of gold was then equal to 411 7|13 kdsus™ And 
a Candy a inscription of the thirteenth century from the 
Sal em district (Aragalur) states that one hundred 
Soliya kdsus went to the fanam 67 . Coppers of various 
sizes usually with the legend Rajaraja on them can still 
be picked up easily in the bazaars of South Indian 
cities, and they, no doubt, are the kdsus of these latex* 
Cola inscriptions. Of the copper issues of the later 
monarchs, Codrington says 58 that they are ‘of the 
same design as the coins of Rajaraja 1, but the human 

••Codringtdn, op. cit. p. 73. 

••40 of 1900; 449 of 1902. 

••264 of 1913; 63 of 1892. 

>•449 St 1902. 

••622 o t 1922. 

••439 of 1918. 

••op. cit. p. 86.. 


\ 



454 


THE CO^AS 


figure is more degraded and the legend roughly 
executed, the Ja sometimes being reversed. In the 
degradation of the type various stages are visible, and 
it is probable that the coins were issued by various 
later kings following the old model without alteration 
of name. The better executed and presumably older 
specimens with a flat blank about .76 inch in width, 
and a weight of some 63 grains, may be the new kasu 
or rather its double’. 

The tiramam is occasionally found mentioned in 
Ttramam. inscriptions; it is not clear if it was a 

coin or only a smaller unit of reckoning. 
At Kanclpuram, in 1076 A. D., six tiramams went 
to the kdsu 5d , while more than forty years later, the 
kasu was the equal of seven tirama7ns G0 in the Ramnad 
district. 

Though the weight and fineness of the standard 

gold coin of the realm were fairly 
weight * sys tems f determinate, there still existed a large 

variety of systems of weighing and 
assaying. Without stopping to give an exhaustive 
account of these systems, a few examples may be given 
to illustrate the general conditions that prevailed. 
In the Tanjore inscriptions of Rajaraja, two different 
weight units are found used, the ddavallan for 
weighing gold and the daksinameruvitankan for jewels. 
Outside Tanjore may be noticed the ‘stone used 
for weighing Rajarajan-kasu’ at Tiruvarur, 61 ’ the 


”1 of 1893. 
*•284 Of 1923. 
•«680 of 1919. 



COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


455 


vaiyagattar-kal at Tirumalavadi 62 , the videl-vidugu-kal 
at Tiruccendurai 63 and Paluvur 64 and the Kempo- 
nagarasu-nirai at Tadi-malingi 66 , or simply the stone 
used in this village of Srikantha-caturvedi-mangalam 
(Tiruverumbur) 66 . The absolute weights of these 
different units are not easily determined, but they all 
used the same denominations of kalanju divided into 
20 nianjadis, each manjadi being the equivalent of two 

kunris. The fineness of gold is like- 
■S wise expressed in different ways. The 

of gold. iineness of the mddai and that of 

sembon (red-gold) have already been 
mentioned. Of these, the term ‘red gold’ was applied 
to gold purified and tested according to certain 
prescribed methods 67 ; apparently it was the same as 
tulai-pon or tnlai-nirai-pon ■ Sometimes, the fineness 
is explained in terms of touch — as nine mattu by the 
ka4ii-nirai-kal as . ‘Of the fineness of palangdm , and 
‘of the fineness prescribed by the (royal) treasury’ 
( talaccemmai ) 69 are other expressions that are 
employed in the early inscriptions of the period. 
There was thus no uniformity cither in the actual 
units of gold currency in circulation or in the standard 
of weight and fineness adopted in different areas for 
the regulation of local transactions. The need for 

“1 of 1920. 

‘•316 of 1903. 

“363 of 1918. 

“491 of 1911. 

“100 of 1892. 

•'«//. ill, p. 229 n. 6. 

“TAS. iv, pp. 139-41. 

“SO of 1925; 356 of 1924. 



456 


THE C6^AS 


1 


‘gold committees’ which were set up by different 
village-assemblies for testing gold is thus clear. 

The same diversity of usage marks the systems 

of land, liquid and grain measures 
other measures adopted in different areas. The nil am 

or veli, called vatikd in Sanskrit in the 
Anbil plates, was the unit measure of land 70 . It was 
divided into U20, 1180, and 11320, a secondary 

series (the first Ml) of 1]320 of this primary series, and 
a tertiary (1|320) 2 (the second Ml) of the same 71 ; 
even a third Ml series (11320) 3 seems to be occasion- 
ally employed. 72 

How exactly the measurement of land was carried 
out to such minute accuracy is not known. But the 
system of measurement by veli which was an ancient 
one in the Cola country spread over the other parts of 
Southern India with the Cola empire and apparently 
disappeared with it. Cola inscriptions in the Pandya 
country for instance used this system, which is not 
found there either before or after the Colas. For all 
the minute care bestowed in the inscriptions from 
Tanjore and elsewhere on the fractional sub-divisions 
of the veli, the extent of the veli seems itself to have 
been somewhat indeterminate. The length of the rod 
(ZceZ)used for measuring land differed with the locality 
as can be gathered from expressions like the 16-span- 


T0 The Tanjore v&H today is 6’ 7 acres. Possibly the ancient unit was 
not different. 

"SII. 11, p. 48 nn. 

**&IL ii, p, 64, paragraph 16. 



COINS, •WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 457 

kol 73 , the kadigaik-kalattu-kkol 7 4 , sri-pdda-kol 73 , the 
mdUgai-kol 70 , and so on. Not only did the extent 
of the kuU differ with the length of the measuring rod 
used, but the number of hulls that made up a ma or 
seru 77 , the twentieth of the veil, also varied con- 
siderably. In Kilur in South Arcot, the md contained 
256 hulls by the 16 span rod in the sixth year of 
Rajendra I 78 ; in the same year in the Tanjore district 
(Tiruvaduturai) one hundred hulls by the maligaikol 
made up the md 79 . About twelve years later, in 
Tiruvamattur not far from Kilur, 200 hulls by the 
16 span rod were reckoned to the md 80 . In land-mea- 
sures, as in currency, therefore, the same tendency to 
standardisation on the part of the central government 
can be traced by the side of the persistence of local 
usage. The mdligai-hdl (the rod of the palace), and 
the 100-kuli-ma as well as the spread of the veli-unit 
outside the Cola country proper may be taken as 
evidence of the attempt to impose a uniform system on 
the provinces. In the temple at Tiruvalangadu in the 
Tanjore district the length of the standard hoi (rod) 
is marked on the stone wall and on the gopuram, to 
conform to the kol found engraved on the wall of the 
Tanjore temple 81 . 

’•261 of 1902; 344 of 1912; 18 of 1922; 811 . 111. 64. Fourteen spans 
In 229 of 1910, twenty In 413 of 1922; twelve in 104 of 1928* 

"160 and 172 of 1921. 

"87 of 1900. 

"99 of 1914; 102 of 1925. 

"250 of 1902. 

"261 of 1902. 

"102 of 1926. 

•°18 of 1922. 

"93, 97 of 1926. 

K— 58 



45 $ 


THE CO^AS 


How little these efforts at standardisation suc- 
ceeded is clear from the chaos of measuring 
standards revealed by the later Cola inscriptions. 
At Tiruvorriyur, in 1072 A..D., the veil comprised 
2000 kirf/s by the sixteen-span rod 82 ; while in 1204 
it is equated to 6£ pddagams in Uttaramerur 83 . 
The md was made up of 138 laths in 1097 at 
Tirukkadaivur 84 , and of 128 lath's bv the standard 
of the sohhd of Tiruvaduturai in 1110 85 , the 
same sabhd employing in the very next year another 
measure by which the md was 100 lath's 88 Again, in 
the South Arcot district, the md was reckoned at 512 
la rfis by the fourteen span rod in 1138 s7 ; and the same 

number of kitlis to the md is found in a record from 

• • 

Muniyur (Tanjore district) in 1220, the length of the 

rod, however, not being specified in this case 88 . And 

a md of 513 lath's is found in Valuvur in the sum;' 

•• •• 

district in the reign of Rajadhiraja II 89 . This list is by 

no means exhaustive ; it is seldom that we have the data 

for converting one unit into another as is found in 

some records of the sabhd, of Tiruvaduturai winch 

• * » 

equate 4| md- s of their measure to six md- s of the 
survey, and six md- s and a Jcani to eight md- s according 
to the general survey which took 100 md- s to the 

kuli 60 . 

•• 

” SII . Ill, 64. 

”76 of 1898. 

•‘243 Of 1925. 

”155 of 1926. This record says that 4J Mid-s of this measure were 
equal to six md-s by the general survey; is this only an approximation? 

“150 of 1925. 

”179-81 of 1918. 

”607 of 1902. 

*•428 of 1912. 

••155 and 144 of 1926. 



COINS, WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 


459 


The same characteristic marks the liquid and 
grain measures used in different, places, and numerous 
kinds of noli and marakkdl find mention in the 
inscriptions. From the Tanjore inscriptions it be- 


comes clear that the Adavalldn equal to Rajakesari 
was adopted as the standard in the accounts of the 
capital city and perhaps of the empire in the time 


of Rajaraja I. Possibly, the same measure is referred 
to as Arumolidevan in the reigns of Rajcnclra and 


Rajadhiraja 91 , though the name Rdjakesari also 


continued in use 92 - 


The distinction between this 


standard measure Rajakesari and another called 
Vldividangan is clearly brought out in a record of the 
twenty-sixth year of Rajaraja I from Tiruvamattur 
stating that a surplus was left as a result of 
measuring paddy by the Vidividangan instead 
of by the Rajakesari 93 . Komalam (Covelong) and 
Kacci-p pedu-ninra n were other measures used in 
Chingleput 94 . It would seem, however, that better 
success attended the effort to standardise liquid and 
grain measures than in other directions; at any rate, 
after the reign of Rajaraja I the inscriptions seem to 
mention fewer varieties of these measures than of 
land measures or gold weights. 


Another standardised unit of value was, strangely 
The mu. enough, the ddn (lit. sheep) which was 

the equivalent of a sum enough to yield 
one measure of ghl per annum as interest; in the 


“401 of 1921; 262 of 1921. 
“140 of 1912. 

”21 of 1922. 

•M.IW5. 1911, II, 21. 



460 


THE C6^AS 


sixteenth year of Rajendra I, 25 kasas were equal to 
22| such adus 96 , giving as many measures of ghi in the 
year. The fractional adus (sheep) mentioned in 
inscriptions 96 can be understood only if they are taken 
to be fractions of a monetary unit, and not of the 
live animal. 

The year is reckoned generally at 360 days, but 
The year instances also occur where calculations 

are based on a year of 365 days 97 . It 
is well known that Hindu astronomical works like the 
Suryasiddlianta and the Siddhunta Siromani mention, 
among others, both these reckonings and prescribe the 
particular purposes for which each may be used. In 
the Cola inscriptions, however, we find both reckonings 
used for the same purpose, c.g., for calculating the 
quantity of ghl necessary for the maintenance of 
lamps. 


••78 of 1896. 

••40 of 1888. 

•*556 of 1904, 731 of 1909, 604 of 1918. 



TABLES OP MAIN WEIGHTS AND MEASURES IN THE 

INSCRIPTIONS. 

1. Liquid and grain measure : — 


2 Sevidu 

— 1 Pidi 
• 

5 Sevidu 

= 1 Alakku 
*• 

2 Alakku 
• • 

= 1 ulakku 
• • 

2 Ulakku 

• 4 

= 1 uri 

2 uri 

= 1 nali 

• • 

8 nali 
•• 

= 1 kuruni 

• 4 4 

2 kuruni 

— 1 Padakku 

2 Padakku 

= 1 Tuni or kadi 98 

4 4 

3 Tuni 

= 1 Kalam 


2. Weight of gold: — 

One manjadi = 2 kunri = 10 ma = 40 kani. 
Twenty manjadi = one kalanju (about 68 to 72 
grains). 

Note . — The ma, and kani are usually 1|20 and 1180 
when applied to a veil of land. Hultzscli 
conjectures {811. ii, p. 65 n.) very 
plausibly that originally the ma, and kani 
had the same fractional value even here, 
and were subdivisions of a unit of 2 
manjadis or a tenth of the kalanju ; coins 
called fananis were usually a tenth of the 
standard kalanju in weight; and the 


“219 of 1921 (RSjar&ja I 22). 



462 


THE C$(<AS 


pam-tukkam (panam-weight) has always 
been a tenth of the kalanju. In 273 of 
1927 (Vik. 3, Sivapuram) the md is 
really 1|20 kasu. 

3. Linear measure used in measuring icons: — 

8 torai (rice-corn) = one viral (finger). 

12 viral = one san (span). 

2 san = one mulam (cubit). 





KEY TO THE PLATES OF COINS 


PLATE I 


1. AV. Wt. 67*5 grs. 

Ob\ : standing figure. To its 

left crescent above four 
pellets and an indistinct 
object (lotus ?) ; a weapon 
or symbol below outstretched 
right arm. 

Key: seated figure. To right in 
Xdgari: §ii 
Raja 

Raja (Elliot. 165). 

2. AR. Wt„ 61*7 grs. 

Obv: standing figure. To its 

left crescent above four 
pellets and an indistinct 
object (lotus ?) ; weapon or 
symbol below outstretched 
right arm. j 

Rev: seated figure. To right in \ 
X a (lari : £ri t 

Raja | 

Raja (cf. 1 above), j 

3. AR. Wt. 52 grs. I 

Same as (2); medium size, j 

i 

4. AR. Wt. 15*8 grs. j 

Same as (2): small size. j 

5. AR. Wt. 32 grs. '■ 

Obv: seated figure. To right in 

Xdgari : Raja 

r&(ja). ; 

Rev: in Tamil: §Skara 

Sekara 


6. AE. Wt. 59*5 grs. 

Obv: standing figure. Crescent 
etc. to its left and weapon 
or symbol under outstretched 
right arm. 

Rev: seated figure. To light 
in Xtfgan : Sri 
RSja 
ra( ?). 

7. AE. Wt. 13 grs. 

Obv: rude figure of standing 

flute player. To left in 
.V Cigar k Ra 

Rev: seated figure. To right 

in Xfigan : Raja 

(Raja). 

8. AR. Wt. 41*7 grs. 

Obv: bow, seated tiger and 

two fishes, all below a 
parasol with a cdmara on 
either side. 

Re\ : In Xagari: Uttama 

Colafi 

(cf. Elliot, 354). 

9. AE. Wt. 73*3 grs. 

Obv: bow, seated tiger and 

two fishes, all below a 
parasol with a cdmara on 
either side, (worn). 

Rev: In Xdgari : Uttama 

Co]ab 

(cf. 8 above) 



PLATE II 


30. AV. Wt. 57*2 grs. 


15. AE. Wt. 51 grs. 


Obv: seated figure, and tiger 
between lamps to right. 

Rev: bow, seated tiger and two 
fishes whole group flanked by 
lamps on either side and set 
beneath a parasol with a 
cdmara on either side. In 
the lower half of field, in 
X&gari : Sri raja ra 
jendra. 

11. AV. Wt. 46*6 grs. 

Obv: and Rev: bow, seated 

tiger and two fishes, whole 
group flanked by lamps on 
either side and set beneath 
a parasol with a cdmara on 
either side. In lower half of 
field, in Xdguri : Gangaikonda 

Col ah ( See 
I A. xxi, p. 323). j 

12. AE. Wt. 48 grs. | 

Obv: rude standing figure. 

Rev: standing bull to light 

with Nfigari Yd in front; 
sun and moon. ( Elliot, 167). 

13. AE. Wt. 36 grs. 


v/w f 




MVUIV 


f 


indistinct objert to its right 
(worn). 

Rev: indistinct symbol- -per- 

haps a Vai§uava mark on a 
pedestal. 

16. AE. Wt. 43 grs. 

Obv: enthroned deity within 
circle of pellets. 

Rev: seated figure; and in- 
distinct object to left; circle 
of pellets visible in part. 

17. AE. Wt. 20 grs. 

Obv: seated figure with lozenge 
of pellets to left. 

Rev : standing figure with a 
lozenge to right and battle 
axe to left. 

m AE. Wt. 7 grs. 


Obv: standing figure ) 


both only 
visible in 
part. 


Rev: seated figure 
If*. AE. Wt. 49 grs. 

Obv: standing figure within a 
circle. 

Rev: seated figuie. To right, 

in Orqntha sri 

kula. 


Obv: rude standing figure. j 

Rev: standing bull to right; ) 

in front of it, moon above : 
and FCmiawtr Vi below, i 
(worn). 

14. AE. Wt. 48 grs. 

Obv: standing figure (part) 

and pellets. 

Rev: elephant to left, fankha ; 
in front, Tamil mfl and j 
pellets above. (Elliot, 371) 1 


Nos. !2 to IS, though not demon- 
strably Cola coins, have 
been included as examples 
of possibly contemporary 
local issues. No. 19 may be 
a Patidya coin. 

Nos. 3, 5, 6, 7 and 13 were kindly 
lent, to me by .Sir T. Desika- 
chari, and the rest by 
Mr. S. T. Srinivasagopala- 
cbari from their respective 
cabinets. 



Plato, U 




i 




Chapter XXIV 

EDUCATION AND LEARNING 

Universal, education is a modern ideal. Modern 

India does not appear yet to have 
The old ideal, quite accepted it. The ancient ideal 

of education in India was ‘to each 
according to his capacity’, capacity being measured 
by the teacher in accordance not only with the pupil ’s 
individual aptitudes but his birth and station in life. 
What is now known as industrial or technical educa- 
tion was largely carried on in the homes of the artisans 
under conditions governed by caste rules and. custom. 

Little evidence of a direct character is available 

Literacy. on the spread of literacy or the extent 

to which it was generally valued. But 
one may hazard the conjecture that the percentage 
of literacy in the population was not lower, it 
was probably higher , 1 than the extremely low 
level revealed by recent censuses. The village school 
assembling under the shade of a tree or in the 
verandahs of temples and vnathas was a common 
institution, and its teacher (vatti ) 2 was among the 
staff of employees remunerated from the common land 
held by the village. The free school at Panaiya- 
varam 8 , South Arcot, mentioned in an undated record, 
belonged, most probably, to the same type. Stone 


‘Of. Elphinstone — History of India’, p. 205 
*17 of 1920. 

*323 of 1917. 



464 


THE COjjAS 


masons and copper smiths were to be found every- 
where to engrave inscriptions on stone and copper, a 
work which' was sometimes done with remarkable 
accuracy and art. The corrupt and colloquial forms 
of words and phrases in several of the inscriptions 
show that the work was generally entrusted to work- 
men who were just literate, but were no scholars. The 
maintenance of the complex records of the government, 
local and central, and the employment for this purpose 
of a considerable staff of officers and clerks may have 
stimulated then as now the resort to scholastic educa- 
tion as an avenue to public employment. There can 
be no doubt that the elaborate bureaucracy set up by 
the growing Cola empire perceptibly increased the 
demand for the services of such men. 


Popular education in a wide sense was amply 

provided for by the recitation and 

education. exposition in temples and other public 

places of the national epics like the 
Ramavana and the Mahabharata, and the Puranas. 
Sometimes the elements of philosophy from the stand- 
point of particular sects were also similarly expounded, 

for instance the Sivadharma 4 , Somasiddhanta, and 
Ramanujabhasya. ; 

Higher education was generally denominational 

in character and pursued in schools 
eduction. and colleges attached to mathas and 

temples. The matha, the palli and the 
vihara were centres of learning which often owned 
large libraries and transmitted by successive 


*321 of 1917; 403 of 1896; 493 of 1919. 



EDUCATION AND LEARNING 


465 


copyings a vast mass of manuscript literature on a 
variety of topics which increased in volume and 

diversity from generation to generation. Besides 
numberless little endowments for the pursuit of 
particular branches of study, like the Mimamsa of 
Prabhakara 5 , and grammar (Vyakarana) 6 , under the 
guidance of individual teachers, there were in existence 
colleges for general higher education, which provided 
instruction in various branches of study and comprised 
a large number of teachers and pupils commanding all 
the facilities for intellectual intercourse provided by 
a common life in the same place, if not also under 
the same roof. '■ Even these large institutions were 
fully endowed and all the places in these colleges were 
free places filled by the most deserving pupils chosen 
from a group of competitors for admission to each 
course of study. These mediaeval South Indian 
colleges have not had the advantage of a full 
description from the pen of a curious and observant 
foreigner like I-tsing, or of having been buried 
underground for centuries and then suddenly revealed 
by the spade of the excavator. But contemporary 
inscriptions bear eloquent testimony to the great 
work done in their day by some of these Hindu 
centres of higher learning and the extent to which’ 
they enlisted the sympathy and appreciation of a 
thoughtful and generous public. In the reign of 

Rajendra I, the sabha, of Rajaraja- 

Epij&yiram. catuiwedimangalam (Ennayiram), in 

South Arcot, resolved in the presence of an officer 

•233 Of 1911; 333 Of 1923. 

•18 of 1898; 202 of 1912. 

K— 59 



466 


THE CtyiAS 


of the king’s government, to arrange for the 
feeding of the pupils and the remuneration of the 
teachers of a college in accordance with the terms of 
an order made by the king himself 7 . From the words 
of the inscription it is not easy to say whether the 
college was founded on this occasion, or had been in 
existence for some time before Rajendra came forward 
to give it such splendid support. However that may 
be, the details recorded in the inscription give an 
accurate idea of the strength of the college, the 
popularity of the different courses, the relative esteem 
in which teachers of different subjects were held in so 
far as this may be judged from their respective salaries, 
and the average cost of maintaining pupils of different 
grades. The provision in this record contemplates 
270 junior students and 70 senior students and a 
teaching staff of 14 persons. Among the junior 
students, Brahmacaris, forty studied the elements of 
grammar according to the Bupdvaldra, and the rest 
were learning the Vedas by rote — 75 devoting them- 
selves to the Rg- and 75 to the Yajur-veda, twenty 
to each of the Vajasaneya, and the Chandoga and 
Talavakara samas, ten to the Atharva-veda and the 
remaining ten to the Baudhayana-grhya, kalpa, and 
gana. Each of these junior pupils was allowed six 
ndlis of paddy per diem. The seventy senior pupils 
( chdtras ) had an allowance of ten ndlis each, and were 
studying three advanced subjects — Vyakarana 25, 
Prabhakara Mimjimsa 35 and the Vedanta 10. It will 
be noticed that, in the courses of study, while all the 


*333 Of 1917, ARE. 1918. 



EDUCATION AND LEARNING 


467 


four vedas are represented, there is only one sutra of 
the Rgveda. The use of the Rupavatara as an intro- 
duction to the elements of Sanskrit grammar in 
Rajendra’s reign 8 , the popularity of the Mimamsa of 
Prabhakara almost to the exclusion of the Bhatta 
school 8 ", and, if the whole college was a Vaisnava 
institution, as most probably it was, the mention of 
Vedanta of the Visistadvaita school as a subject of 
study long before the great Bhasya of Ramanuja came 
into existence, should also be noted as of particular 
significance to the history of Sanskrit learning in 
South India. Among teachers, the largest daily 
allowance in grain of one kalam and a third went to 
the professor of Vedanta; the nambis who taught the 
Mimamsa and Vyakarana. came next, getting one 
kalam each. All the others were on the same level 
receiving only three kurunis or a fourth of a kalam 
per diem. Besides these daily allowances of grain, all 
the teachers and cMtras (senior pupils) except the 
professor of Vedanta got other allowances in gold— 
at the rate of one kalafiju per adhyaya taught in the 
case of Vyakarana and Mimamsa teachers, entitling 
them to 8 kalanjus and 12 kalanjus respectively for a 
whole course, and a half kalaiiju per head per annum 
for all the rest. To make money by teaching Vedanta 
was prohibited by law T and custom, and this, 
apparently, was the reason why no payment in gold 

•Dharmakirti, the author of the Rupdvatdra, must have lived much 
earlier than the 12th century, the date assigned to him by M. Kangacharya 
in his edition of the Rdpdvatara , p. xv. 

••This may have been due to the common epistemological standpoint 
of the Vai$pava Vigiirt&dvaita and Prabhakara mimamsa in holding that 
ail knowledge is valid. 



468 


THE CO(<AS 


was offered to the teacher of Vedanta. Another 
college, quite similar to that at Ennayiram, was main- 
tained at Tribhuvani, near Pondicherry 9 . There 

Tribhuvani. were in it 260 students and 12 teachers. 

The subjects of study were generally 
those prescribed at Ennayiram; the Prabhakaram is 
not mentioned, but other new subjects come in, like the 
Satyasadha sutras, besides Bharata, Ramayana, Manu 
sastra and Vaikhanasa sastra, these last being 
expounded to popular audiences rather than taught as 
school subjects. The daily allowances to students and 
teachers were all in grain; the junior students were 
allowed six measures each and the senior eight; among 
teachers, the professor of Vedanta got a kalam and a 
sixth, while the others received varying allowances 
ranging from one kalam to a fourth of it. The 
inscription of the thirtieth year of Rajadhiraja, 
A.D. 1048 which records these facts, also exempts the 
teachers and students of the college from active 
service on the committees of the village-assembly 
in accordance with a resolution of the sabhd. 

i 

Next we have the celebrated Tirumukkudal 

v inscription of Virarajendra, A. D. 

Tirumukkfltfai. 1067 10 , certainly among the longest 

inscriptions of the world. This inscrip- 
tion contains a very detailed account of the entire 
budget of receipts and expenses in the local temple of 
Mahavisnu, and the schedule of expenses included 
provision for a college and a hospital. The college 


•176 of 1919. 

*°1$2 of 1915, EL xxi. pp. 220 ft 



EDUCATION AND LEARNING. 


469 


was a comparatively small institution and only two 
, Vedas (Ijtg and Yajus) and Vyakarana with 
Bupdvatdra were taught in it. Provision was made 
for one teacher and ten pupils for the studying of each 
of the two chief Vedas, and for one teacher and twenty 
pupils in the Vyakarana school." The Veda teachers 
were remunerated at the rate of ohe padakku of paddy 
per day and four gold kdsus per annum, while the 
teacher of Vyakarana was paid a tuni — twice a 
padakkur —' per diem and ten kdsus per annum. It is 
clear that the Veda school was only what is now called 
an adhyayana-putha-sdlu, a school where puplis are 
trained to repeat the text by rote. The pupils were 
provided not only with food on the basis 1£ nalis of 
rice per diem and suitable side dishes, but with mats 
for sleeping on, oil for their heads on Saturdays 
(fifty-one Saturdays being counted to the year), and 
a night light. There were also two women servants 
who looked after the menial service required by the 
schools and their pupils. 

An inscription of the third year of Vikrama Cola, 
A. D. 1121 11 , from Tiruvaduturai, mentions that 
among persons who were to be fed in a matha in that 

place were students of medicine and 

at^riru v a<futuj^ grammar, learners of Vagbhata’s 

Astaiigahrdaya, of the Carakasamhitd 

and of the Bupdvatdra. Another inscription of 
A.D. 1213 from Tiruvorriyur recapitulates the 


>■159 of 1926. 



470 


THE CO^AS 


legend of Siva expounding the fourteen Yyakarana 

sutras to Panini, localises the legend 

vyakaraija in the Yyakaiana-dana-mandapa in 
Tiruvorriyflr. the temple of Tiruvorriyur, and records 

an endowment of sixty-five veils of 
land towards the maintenance of a school of 
Yyakarana in the mandapa and of the mandapa 
itself in proper repair 118 . From Tiruvidaikkali in the 
Tanjore district, we have yet another inscription, 
dated A. D. 1229, which provides for the free feeding 
in the local matha of Brahmin students of the Yedanta 
from the Malabar country 12 . There were, besides, 
several endowments for rewarding merit and distinc- 
tion attained in these scholastic pursuits, like the one 
at Kamarasavalli, dated A.D. 998, to those who 
recited portions of the Talavakara-sama 13 . There 
were also other organisations of a learned character 
like the Ghatika of Yembarrur 14 of which only the 
names have come down to us. 

While we thus find much evidence on the nature 

and organisation of higher studies in 
Tajmi studies. Sanskrit, it is somewhat disappointing 

that we are left with practically no 
tangible evidence on the state of Tamil learning; yet 
there can be no doubt that the numerous mathas, the 
names of which are recorded in inscriptions all over the 
country, did serve as more or less important centres 

1 “202 of 1912. 

”276 of 1926. 

1S 76 of 1914. 343 of 1917 from Epp&yiram provides for presents to 
reciters of all the VSdas. 

**293 of 1903. 



EDUCATION AND LEARNING 


471 


for the promotion of learning, religious and secular, in 
the Tamil language. We may be certain that then, as 
now, it was one of the principal tasks of the mathas 
to train the bands of choristers who sang the 
Tiruppadiyam in the temples- 



Chapter XXY 
RELIGION 

, The temple and the matha were the two great gifts 

of mediaeval Hinduism to Southern 
T ^a)L and India. It was under the Colas that 

these institutions entered on a process 
of gradual expansion and adaptation, which attracted 
the imagination of the populace and the benefactions 
of the rich;\they thus reached a secure position of 
ascendancy over the Buddhist viharn and Jain palli, 
and this position they retained almost unimpaired 
till our own time.' In the stress of the conflict with 
heretical rivals who denied the sanctity of the Yeda 
and questioned the existence of the Deity, there arose 
within Hinduism a tendency to close up its ranks, 
and foster a religious syncretism which found room 
within the fold of its orthodoxy for all forms of 
theistie belief. This syncretism was based on the 
conception of Trimurti, the threefold manifestation of 
the same godhead. 

In the eighth and ninth centuries, Southern 

India produced the two great Hindu 
The background, champions Kumarila and Sankara 

who fought the battle of ancient 
Brahmanism against heresy, though there was ‘little 
persecution in our sense of the word’ 1 .') The stories of 
persecution are late popular legends that were put into 
melodious verse by the pious credulity of the author of 
the Periya Puranam. Under the leadership of Sankara, 


'Hinduism and Buddhism, p. xl. 



RELIGION 


m 


Hinduism absorbed many of the distinctive features 
of the speculative system and the practical organisa- 
tion of latter day Buddhism. This is the chief reason 
why, on the one hand, Buddhism was so completely 
banished from Southern India in later times, and on 
the other, the opponents of Sankara’s system found 
it easy to stigmatise him as a Buddhist in disguise. 


* 

The battle against heresy had been joined, how- 
ever, long before Sankara’s day by the great Saiva 
Nayanars and the Vaisnava Alvars. The ‘emotional 
theism’ of these masters of popular song, ‘running in 
the parallel channels of Visnuism and Saivism’ is in 
many ways the most characteristic product of Tamil 
religious experience. The great work done by these 
holy men who traversed the whole of the Tamil land 
several times over, singing, preaching and organising, 
has ever since been treasured by a grateful posterity 

in beautiful legends which are signi- 


A beautiful 
legend. 


Scant even in their anachronisms. One 
such tale is that of a friendly meeting 


between Nanasambandar and Tirumangai Alvar. The 
earliest narrative of this incident accessible to us is 
that of the Divyasuricarita-. Sambandar, the opponent 
of Jainism, is said to have gone forth from Shiyali in 
his eagerness to meet the great Vaisnava antagonist of 
Buddhism and to invite him to Shiyali. Tirumangai 
would not set foot in a city which had no temple of 
Visnu, and Sambandar overcame the objection by dis- 
closing the existence of an ancient image of Visnu that 


*Canto xiv, 89*99. 

K— 60 



474 


THE COLAS 


had once stood in a temple, since ruined, and was being 
regularly worshipped at the time by an areola in his 
private dwelling. Sambandar and Tirumangai then 
entered Shivali together; there Tirumangai composed 
some hymns which Sambandar admired greatly, and 
before leaving for his own city of Alinagar, he induced 
some rich persons engaged in embellishing the Siva 
temple to undertake the renovation of that of Visnu as 
well and to shed their hostility to the sister creed. 
Impossible as history 3 , this beautiful legend enshrines 
the belief in the common mission of Saivism and 
Vaisnavism, entertained bv the Tamil Yaisnavas of 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries. In stemming the 
strong current of anti-Vedic heresy, the alrars and the 
vayanars had laboured together in the past, and what 
was more natural for their successors than to bring 
together the great Saiva antagonist of Jainism and 
the equally great Vaisnava opponent of Buddhism ? 
Let it also be noted that the currency of such a story 

in the eleventh and early twelfth centuries implies that 
Saivism and Vaisnavism had not yet developed the 
relentless sectarian hostility that usually characterised 
their relations in later times. The story of the Co] a 
persecution of Ramanuja, however, may be said to 


•For an unconvincing attempt to treat this as history, see S. K. 
Aiyangar, Ancient India , pp. 413-4. M. Raghava Aiyangar, on the other 
hand, suggests that the story is the result of a confusion between 
Alucjaiya Nambi, i.e., Sundaramurti, the real contemporary of Tirumangai, 
and Aludaiya Pi]]ai (Sambandar). 'Alvdrgal K&lanilai, p. 137 — a 
shrewd guess, but not more. More recently the same scholar has 
restated some of Dr. S. K. Alyangar's arguments and sought to 
establish the contemporaneity of the two hymnists; but his new argu- 
ment rests on the unproven and improbable assumption that Nandi- 
varman Pallavamalla had the title Vairamegha. Dr. 8 . Krishnaswami 
Aiyangar Commemoration Volume , p. 210. 



RELIGION 


475 


mark the beginning of sectarian intolerance within the 
fold of Hinduism; and the legend of the mee ting of 
Sambandar and Tirumangai was, perhaps, but the 
expression of the wistful memory of happier times. 

Under the Colas of the line of Vijayalaya may be 
said to commence the Silver Age of South Indian 

m 

Saivism and Vaisnavism. Difficult as it is to propose 
precise dates in the present state of the evidence, we 
may still be certain that the sacred hymns of the 
ndyanars and the dlydrs were arranged in canonical 
form some time in the eleventh centuiy. 


Nambi Andar Nambi, the author who arranged 

the Saiva Canon substantially in the 
form in which we now find it, was 
most probably a contemporary of 
Rajaraja I and Rajendru I. The account of his 
life and work given in a short Purana by Umapati 


The Saiva 
Canon. 


Siva Aearya in the early fourteenth century seems 
to conserve, in the midst of much legendary matter, 
a fairly correct account of the growth of the canon 
in the hands of Nambi himself and his successors. 
A proper regard for this fact must set at rest the 
argument adduced by some writers that the inclusion, 
in the canon, of Nambi ’s own poems and those 
of other writers like Karuvur Devar, manifestly 
later than Rajaraja’s reign, and the titles Abhaya 
and Kulasekhara given by Umapati to the Cola king 
who was Nambi ’s contemporary, imply a later date 
for the redaction of the canon 4 . Even in Nambi ’s 


4 See K. S. Srinivasa Pillai — Tamil Varaldru , Part II, pp. 179 ff. 
Contra A.R.E. 1918 II 34 which, strangely enough, makes Sekkijar the 
author of Purapam on the Discovery of the Tirumuyai. 



476 


THE CO^AS 


:ime, difficulty was experienced in making the 
collection of hymns complete — as may be seen from 
;he hymn on Tiruvidaivayil by N anasambandar, un- 
known to the canon, and preserved in an inscription 6 , 
and from the legend of the destruction by white ants 
of the bulk of the palm leaves containing the hymns. 


The practice of reciting these hymns in temples 

had come into vogue long before the 
Tiruppadiyam. time of Rajaraja. (At Lalgudi and 

Attur in the Trichinopoly district are 
found inscriptions of the reign of Parantaka I, pro- 
viding for Brahmins singing the Tiruppadiyam during 
the daily, service in the temples 6 . Earlier than 
Parantaka ’s reign, in the reign of the Pallava Vijaya- 
N andi- V ikrama Varman, reciters of the Tiruppadi- 
yam are enumerated in a list of persons employed in 
the service pf a. temple at Tiruvallam 7 . ' The inference 
is clear that the hymns had attained the status of 


divine literature long before Nambi Andar Nambi 
collected and edited them in the standard form in 
which they have reached us. From the reign of 
Parantaka I there is a regular series of endowments® 
recorded in epigraphs of the Cola and Tondai coun- 
tries for the recitation of these hymns in temples, to 
ijie^accpmpaniment of musical instiounents. The men- 
tion of a Devaranayakam, Superintendent of Devaram, 


•8 of 1918. 

•373 of 1903 and 99 of 1929. 

T *S7/. iii, p. 93, 11. 32*3. 

•129 of 1914; 349 of 1918. 358 of 1903; 199 of 1915 etc. The mention 
of TirwvemMvai in 12 of 1905, of Tiruccdlal in 165 of 1906, and of 
TiruvenMvai and Tiruv&davurdli-nayandr in 421 of 1912 is noteworthy. 



RELIGION 


477 


in the reign of Rajendra I, implies that there was a 
regular state department controlling this work and 
securing its proper performance ; it is not clear if the 
sphere of its activity was limited to Tan j ore or 
extended to other places 80 . 


Vaispava 

canon. 


The history of Vaisnava hymnology in the period 

was quite similar. Tradition confers 
upon Nathamuni the honour of having 
done for Yaisnava lyrics what ISTambi 
Andar Nambi achieved for the Saiva ones. If Srlnatha 
who seems to be mentioned in the Anbil plates 9 may be 
taken to be the same as the Yaisnava Saint Nathamuni, 
his age would be the end of the ninth and the beginning 
of the tenth centuries A.D., and this accords well 
with the other testimony we have, meagre as it is, on 
the subject.'* However that may be, the contents of 
the Anbil plates, the strong Vaisnavism of the family 
of Aniruddha, the minister of Parantaka II, the life of 
his father whose glory was his learning and the num- 
ber of his disciples, the attachment of his mother and 
grandfather to God Ranganatha, the liberal support 
extended by his great grand-father Ananta to the poor 
and the indigent, — these furnish a clear idea of the 
part played by Yaisnavism in the social and religious 
life of the time. And the age of Nathamuni ’s ministry 
cannot lie far from it, as he was the first of the great 
succession of Acaryas who carried forward and com- 
pleted the work started by the Alvars of an earlier 
time 10 . The story is that Nathamkni once heard some 


•*97 of 1932. See, however, Tamil Lexicon, s. v. Devaram. 

# v. 46; also El. xv, p. 64. 

^ftthamuni’s birth place is called VIran&rayapapuram ; this recalls 
a surname of Par&ntaka I. 



478 


THE CO^AS 


visitors to his place from Kurugur recite a hymn of ten 
verses from the Tiruvaymoli, the 1000 hymns composed 

by Sathakopa, also called Nammalvar. Captivated by 

the melody of the hymn and noticing from its last 
verse that it comprised only ten out of a thousand 
verses composed by Nammalvar, Nathamuni under- 
took a journey to Kunigur, the birth-place of 
Nammalvar, in the hope of discovering the whole 
collection there. At Kunigur, after worshipping 
Visnu, Nathamuni resorted to the foot of the sacred 

tamarind tree in his desire to meet the Alvar; great 
was his grief and disappointment when he found 
his yogic powers unequal to the task of invoking a 

a vision of Satliakopa. He then adopted the plan of 
reciting 12,000 times the hymn of Madhurakavi 
on Sathakopa, his guru; pleased by this, both Satha- 
kopa and Madhurakavi appeared before Nathamuni 
and imparted to him the knowledge of the four 
Prabandhas 11 with their full import. Thereafter 
Nathamuni stayed in Kurugur meditating upon the 
Prabandhas until he was summoned by Viranarayana 
Kr§na, the god of his native place, to go back to 
Yiranarayanapuram, where he collected a band oC 
disciples round himself and made them sing these 
hymns to divine tunes 12 . It were erael and futile to 

“i.e., the works of SathakOpa. 

^Divyasuricaritra, xvi, 13*21. The same story is repeated with some 
natural embellishments, in. the Guruparamparas. The main differences 
introduced by the later account are: (a) the visitors to VIranar&yapa* 

puram, from whose recitation of a hymn Nathamuni learned of the 
existence of the hymns, are stated to have come from the Western 
country, and not Kurugfir. (b) At KurugQr, N&thamuni is told definitely 
by Par&nkufiad&sa, a pupil pf Madhurakavi, that the Tiruvaymoli and 
other sacred literature had been lost for a long time, (c) All the 4,000 
hymns, not only the one thousand and odd of S&thakopa, are revealed 
to Nathamuni. 



RELIGION 


479 


dissect such fanciful tales with the weapons of 
historical criticism- In its integrity, this story is 
typical of the Indian way of keeping fresh the memory 
of great men and their deeds. It justifies the 
inference that the Vaisnava canon was arranged and 
its musical modes settled by the first great Acarya of 
the second great division in the history of Vaisnavism 
in South India, the one that falls between the age of 
the hymns and that of the great commentators that 
followed long after Ramanuja. 13 The mention of 
Tiruvaymolidevar in an inscription at Ukkal in 
Rajaraja’s reign, and of the recitation, of Tiruppa- 
diyam in Visnu temples is enough to show the 
parallelism in practice between Saivism and 
Vaisnavism in this respect. Two inscriptions of the 
‘reign of Rajendra I from Uttaramerur provide for the 
distribution of the food offered to the deity among 
Sri- Vaisnavas reciting Tintppadiymn during wor- 
ship, 14 and create an endowment of land for the 
maintenance of three persons who were to recite 
Tinivmjmoli regularly in the temple 15 . The recitation 
of TiruvaymoU during tiruppalli-yelucci in the 
Srirangam temple is provided for in a record of 
A.D. 1085 16 . The fact that the hymn of Kulasekhara- 

alvar beginning tettarundiral was recited before the 
deity during three nights in the course of a festival in 

Bhandarkar's date, twelfth century A.D., for Kulagekhara 
AJlv&r (Vai$ruivism etc., pp. 49-50) is clearly wrong. A hymn of 
Kula$£khara is specifically mentioned by its first words Tettarundiral — In 
an inscription of the year A.D. 1088. (£11. iii, p. 148). 

“181 of 1923. 

“176 of 1923. 

“61 of 1892. 



480 


THE CtyiAS 


Srlrangam is mentioned in an inscription of 
A.D. 1088 17 . The recitation of Tiruvdymoli during 
the festivals in the months of Arpisi (October- 
November) and Vaigasi (May-June) at Tirukkoyilur 
is provided for in an inscription of the eighth year of 
Rajadhiraja II, A. D. 1171 18 . A choir of fifty-eight. 
Brahmins reciting Tirumoli in KancT is mentioned 
in A. D. 1242 19 . An inscription from Tirukkoyilur, 
of uncertain date, records an endowment for the 
recitation of Tiruvedu'nddndagam in the local 
Visnu temple 20 . Lastly, an inscription perhaps of 
Kulottunga III, mentions the creation at Kanclpuram 
of a bhdsya-vrtti for the Ramanuja-bhasya being 
regularly expounded by a competent person 21 . And 
these instances are by no means exhaustive. 

One curious instance of a contemporary composi- 
tion of a tiruppadiyam beginning Kolandr-kulal in 
praise of Visnu at Tirumalpuram is recorded in an 
inscription of A. D. 995 22 ; such imitations of the 
canonical hymns seem however to have been quite rare, 
and unlike the later Saiva compositions, have found 
no place in canonical literature. 

(It may be noted that the recitation in the temples 

of the sacred hymns in Tamil emplia- 
Eecitai of Veda sises the rank assigned to them by the 

side of the Sanskritic Vedas, both by 

"62 of 1892. 

"343 of 1921. 

"567 of 1919. 

"126 of 1900, a record of §6Jia-KSralad€va. 

"493 of 1919. 

"333 of 1906. 



RELIGION 


481 


the Saivas and the Yaisnavas. That the Yedas were 
chanted day by day in the temples at the time of 
worship by Brahmins specially appointed for the 
purpose becomes clear not only from the practice 
obtaining even now in the larger temples, but from a 
number of contemporary inscriptions of the Cola 
period 23 . Of such records one or two may be noted 
as being of special interest. : In the fourteenth year 
of a Rajakesari 24 , an endowment was created in 
Pandaravadai for awarding a prize once a year in 
a recitation contest .to be held on the night of the 
Ardra festival, the competitors being required to 
recite a prescribed portion of the Jaiminiya Sama 
Yeda. On the occasion of festivals, more men were 
employed to recite Yedas before the deity than on 
ordinary days, and such occasional services were also 
often endowed 25 . Other instances of recitations, 
more popular in character and intended for the 

instruction and edification of devotees 
and other works. are mentioned in the inscriptions ; such 

are the Srl-purana of Aludaiyanambi 
and the Sivadharma 26 , and the Soma-siddhanta. 
The nature of these works is by no means clear at 
present, though the last appears, from a reference to 

”103 of 1926; 52 of 1928. 

”266 of 1923. 

**SIL ii, 25 seems to me to record one such endowment. The phrase 
employed is tirup-pazai-araiyavuin ; Hnltzsch has taken this to mean: 
“to beat the sacred drum/' The fact that the act had to be performed 
by apilrvis of the ghafikd (See SII. iii, p. 233 n. 2) suggests the need for 
a better interpretation; parai means also ‘word' and ‘ajfai', 'speak' or 
'recite'. I think it is the recitation of the Vedas, the Sacred Word, that 
is in question here. 

*•403 of 1896, 214 of 1911 and 321 of 1917. 

K — 61 


4 



482 


THE C6*iAS 


it in the Prdbodhacandrodaya, to have propounded the 
doctrine of the Kapalika school of Saivism 27 . 

'Besides the collection and conservation of sacred 

V 

Temples. literature, the new life in religion 

manifested itself in the erection of 
stone temples, great and small, in all the holy places 
hallowed by association with the lives of the alvars 
and ndyandrs of the earlier age. As a religious 
institution, the South Indian Temple reaches back to 
a remote antiquity, and the existence of numerous 
temples ( kottams ) of Brahminical, Buddhist and 
Jain deities is fully attested by the San gam literature. 
The early temples were structures of brick and mortar, 
or, under the Pallavas, carved out of solid blocks of 
granite, rock-cut ‘cave temples’ 28 . The art of erecting 
structural temples of stone was not unknown, and the 
Kailasanatha temple at Kancipuram and the shore 
temple at Mahabalipuram show the rapid advance in 
architectural achievement in the two centuries after 
Mahendravarman, the Vicitra-citta who marvelled at 
his own feat in having brought into existence a temple 
without metal, timber or brick 29 . That stone temple3 
were, however, still rare in the Cola country in the 
ninth and tenth centuries, and that the kings of the 
Vijayalaya line led the way in multiplying their 
number all over the country is fully borne out by 
contemporary inscriptions. The Anbil plates state 

21 ARE. 1912, II, 29. See also Tucci's citations in JPA8B . xxvi 
(1930), pp. 130-2. 

2, The Anaimalai (Madura) ‘Cave Temple' to Narasimha is one of 
the few early P&pgya temples known. El. viii, pp. 317 If. 

**m. xrii, p. 14. 



RELIGION 


483 


that the chief glory of the rule of Aditya I was that 
he covered the banks of the Kaveri, along its whole 
course from the mountain to the sea, with a number of 
lofty and impregnable temples built, of -stogge , and 

dedicated to Siva. The inscriptions of the reign of 

** 1 ' ' 1 * * * '* 

Parantaka I show that Aditya ’s work was continued 
by his successor who is reputed to have covered with 
gold the roof of the Cidambaram temple. Besides 
the kings, some of their relatives and officials stand out 
prominent among the leaders in this widespread move- 
ment. Tirukkarrali-piccan (Piecan of the sacred 
stone temple) of whom there is still a sculpture in 
Tiruvaduturai 30 was one of them and he was in the 


service of Parantaka I. Even the Rastrakuta invader, 
Ki’sna III, erected several temples in the land newly 
conquered by him, one of them being the Kalapriya 
at Kaveripakkam 31 . Sembiyan-mahadevi, the queen 
of Gandaraditya and mother of Gtfariia ' C5la, was 
Widowed early In life arid lived on for many years 
thereafter. Hers was a life of religious devotion, 
arid possibly the crime by which her son cleared his 
way to tiie throne added poignancy to her piety. In 
any case, she used all her great influence and resources 
throughout her son’s reign and far into that of his 
successor Rajaraja I for the construction and the very 
liberal endowment of an unusually large number of 
temples 32 . The village Sembiyan-mahadevi was 
altogether her foundation and the stone temple dedi- 
cated to Candramaulisvara at Tiruvakkarai in South 


">132 of 1925. 

•'SI. iv, p. 281. and 382 of 1905. 
••ARE. 1926, II, 22. 



484 


THE CO^AS 


Arcot, built about A. D, 1001, was among the latest 
foundations of her life. Either as renovating old 
structures or founding hew ones, or, more rarely, as 
commemorative monuments of a sepulchral character, 
the construction of stone temples continued throughout 
the Cola period and, in fact, has gone on till our own 
times. The most conspicuous monuments of the early 
eleventh century, and in some ways the finest of all 
^SftP-th Indian temples, were those of Tanjore and of 
Gan|ai-Konda-solapuram. 

The Tanjore inscriptions of the reign of Rajaraja 

furnish an unusually full view of the 

fawsm* state of Saivism at the time. The 

hagiology that, more than a century 
later, found its classic poet in Sekkilar, was already 
quite popular ; and some of it found representation in 
the iconography of the time, though with some 
differences in detail from the later version 83 . And 
South Indian Saivism appears to have had a live 
contact with Saivism in the rest of India, as may be 
seen from Rajendra I providing for the annual supply 
of a large quantity of grain as acdryabhdga to Udaiyar 
iSarva Siva Pandita, who was performing the worship 
in the Tanjore temple and his pupils, and their pupils, 
whether they lived in the Aryadesa, Madhyadesa or 
Gaudadesa 34 . Inscriptions of the reign of 

e^dence of the existence of this 
connection between Northern India and the South ih 
late Cola times as well. A certain Omkaraafiya 


** 811 . ii, Introduction, pp. 39-40. 

•*8IL ii# 20. See Gopinatha Kao, Hindu Iconography, ii, Intr. 



RELIGION 


485 


Iravalar, gave some money in 1214 as provision for 

tiruppavitram to the deity at Tiruppasur (Chingleput 

district); the donor is described as a disciple of 

Jnanasiva Iravalar of the Santana of Laksadhyaya 

Iravalar of the Kolla-matha at Varanasi (Benares) 35 . 

Another Iravalan of the Bliiksamatha of Varanasi is 

• • • • 

mentioned in an inscription at Pandanallur ( Tan j ore 
district) dated three years later. 36 A tradition is 
preserved in some stray verses quoted t>y Ananta- 
sambhu (in his gloss on the Siddhantasaravali of 

Trilocanasiva), 37 that Rajendra I imported Saivas 
from the banks of the Ganges and established them in 
various places in the Cola country; this tradition also 
points to the same fact that there was a live contact 
between Saiva institutions in the different parts of 
India. 


Toleration; the 
rule. 


Speaking generally, the religious temper of the 

period, particularly in the first half of 
it, was by no means narrow or secta- 
rian. Not only did the kings as a rule 
tolerate religions and sects other than their own, but 
they often patronised all persuasions in equal 
measure. A progressive king like Rajaraja even 
made it a point to give clear expression to his general 
attitude to religion by including in the decorative 
motifs of the Great Siva Temple of Tanjore themes 
from Vai§navism and even Buddhism. His sister 
Kundavai built three temples, one to Visnu, another to 




••111 of 1930. 

••72 of 1931. 
"JOR. vli, p. 200. 



486 


THE CO^AS 


Siva and a third to Jina, all in the same place. Baja- 
rajapuram, now called Dadapuram, and her gifts to all 
these shrmes are found recorded in the same inscrip- 
tion 38 . The list of jewels includes several ndmams, 
the Vaisnava caste-mark, made of gold. There were 
several temples which contained shrines both of Siva 
and of Visnu side by side, the most conspicuous 
instance being that of Cidambaram:- The relative 
position of the icons of Nataraja and Govindaraja in 
this temple is brought out with great precision in the 
verse in the Timkko vaiyar which depicts Visnu as 
lying in front of Nataraja, absorbed in the contempla- 
tion of the foot lifted in his dance and supplicating 
him for a view of the other foot as well 39 . In the 
precincts of the temple of Candramaulisvara, at 
Tiruvakkarai, which was rebuilt of stone by Sembiyan- 
mahadevi, was a shrine of Varadaraja-perumal, 
originally built of bricks by Koccola and reconstructed 
in stone in the short reign of Adliirajendra 40 . If this 
is a reference to Senganan, the legendary Cola king 
whom Tirumangai calls by that name 41 , nothing can 
be more significant than this epigraphical reference to 
his construction of a Visnu temple by the side of 
Tirumangai celebrating him for the foundation of 
seventy beautiful palaces to the eight-armed Isa. 
Hinduism was still an attitude to life as a whole, which 

**8 of 1919. G. Jouveau-Dubreuil has stated that the ndmam is 
not seen earlier than fifteenth century. ( Archeologie du sud de V 
Inde ii # p. 62). This inscription gives clear evidence of its use at least 
lour centuries earlier. 

••Verse 86. 

••205 of 1904. 

4 1 Periya'tirur'moli i VI, 6, 4. 



RELIGION 


487 


had not lost itself in an arid desert of sectarian 
rivalries. 


It should hardly cause any surprise that there 

were occasions in which intolerance of 
some exceptions, a rival sect got the upper hand. For 

even when the various creeds lived in 
mutual good-will and enjoyed equal patronage from 
the princes and nobles of the land, each sect lived its 
own separate and exclusive life, and nothing in the 
history of Indian society is more remarkable than its 
fatal capacity to combine intellectual tolerance with 
social exclusiveness. But social exclusiveness is 


bound, sometime or other, to produce its natural result 
of indifference to the welfare of other groups than 
one’s own, and when doctrinal differences become 
acute, this indifference very soon develops into active 
hostility. The leading instance of religious intoler- 
ance in the period of Cola rule is that of the persecu- 
tion of Ramanuja and his followers by a Cola monarch 
whose identity is not altogether free from doubt. We 
have seen reason to believe that this persecution led 
to a popular revolt in which Adhirajendra, the last 
ruler in the male line descending from Vijayalaya, 
lost his life. If this is a correct view of the course of 


events, two inferences may be drawn. First, that far 
from being part of a definite policy of the Cola 
monarchy to root out Vaisnavism, the persecution of 
Ramanuja was only the freak of an individual ruler. 
Secondly, that the general atmosphere was so 


unfavourable to. a narrow religious policy, that the 
monarch who attempted it lost his life in a popular 
revolt and has ever since been universally abhorred as 



488 


THE CO^AS 


the krmi kantha (the putrid neck). No persecution 
has ever failed to turn out ultimately to the profit of 
the persecuted faith, and there is no doubt that the 
creed of Ramanuja, already well established in the 
land by the ministrations of a long- line of dlvars and 
dcdryas , drew fresh strength from the foolish and 
short-lived attempt to crush it out of existence. 


The fact remains, however, that from this period, 
the Saivas and the Vaisnavas of South India 


became strangers to that friendly feeling which 

* * W I ^ 

subsisted between them in an earlier age when they 
waged a common war against the Bauddhas and the 


J ainas. 


Another spasmodic outburst of anti-Vaisnava 
feeling is much better attested than the persecution of 
Ramanuja, which is so overgrown with legend that the 
real course of events seems to be lost beyond recovery. 
We refer to the deeds of Kulottunga II in 
Cidambaram which are, as we have seen, clearly 
attested by contemporary inscriptions and literature. 
That Kulottunga II was a fanatic Saiva who wanted 
to upset the time-honoured disposition of the images 
of Siva and Visnu in the great temple of the holiest 

«****► x i * * " 1 ^ * * J 

centre of South Indian Saivism cannot be gainsaid. 
The balance of the two faiths, thus rudely upset by 
Kulottunga, was redressed in later days by the Vijaya- 
nagar rulers, but once again, the old harmony was 
gone, and the attitude of the two groups of devotees 
that have to jostle in the premises of the temple is 
hardly as friendly as the relative positions of the 
deities they worship would seem to require. 



RELIGION 


489 


A measure of the increasing social exclusiveness 
of the different sects is found in a casual decision, 
dated A. D. 1160, of the Mahasabha of Tirukkadai- 
yur 42 . "The sabha resolved that any mdhesvaras who, 
contrary to their tenets as custodians of the Siva 
temple and its observances, mixed freely with 
Vaisnavas, would forfeit their property to the temple/)’ 
This is almost the only recorded instance of this kind ; 
even so, its significance is unmistakable. It is, no 
doubt, typical of the new religious atmosphere, of the 
steady deterioration that was setting in. 


K&ficl. 


The unique position of Kanclpuram, one of the 

Y , I _ *i I 

capital cities of the Cola empire, is 
very instructive in regard to the mutual 
relations of the rival religious systems which were 
competing for the royal patronage and popular favour 
This city is seen to have comprise^,, three principal 


sections, each consecrated to a particular faith and the 
Institutions ministering to it. The biggest of them all 

is devoted to Siva, then comes what is often called 
Little Kanclpuram sacred to Vispu in the form of 
Ilasti-giri-alvar or Arulala Perumal, and lastly we 
have Jina-kancI, popularly known as Tirupparutti- 
kkunru, undoubtedly larger and more prosperous and 
in more direct and frequent communication with 
Kanclpuram proper in the days of the Cola empire 
than at the present day. ’. Let us also recall that many 
vestiges of what must once have been a considerable 
Buddhist colony have been found at Kanclpuram. 
We see in the plan of the different parts of this great 




**257 of 1926. 

K— 62 



490 


THE CO^AS 


and ancient city and their mutual relations much that 
is suggestive of the history of religious beliefs and 
practices at their best in South India. 

The impression of tolerance and eclecticism 
_ that generally characterised the 

religious outlook of the time is 
strengthened by a study of the pantheon which in- 
cluded an assortment of all conceivable deities to 
whom worship was offered throughout the country. 
Besides images of Siva in his various aspects 43 
like Kiratarjuniya, Bhiksatana, Kalyanasundra, 
Paheadeha, Lingapuranadeva, Umasahita, Nataraja, 

Daksinamurti, Sri Kantha and so on, the icons 
presented to the great temple of Tanjore by its royal 

patrons included images of Ganapati, Subrahmanya, 
Maha Yisnu and Surya 44 . There were also images of 
Saiva saints receiving regular worship among them 
like Candesvara, the three authors of the Devaram, 
Meypporul-nayanar, Siruttondar, Siralar 45 and 
others. Among goddesses are mentioned Kala-pidari, 
Durga-Paramesvari and Emalattu Durgaiyar Omkara- 
sundari 46 . The Tanjore inscriptions mention inci- 
dentally other minor deities worshipped in several 
outlying villages ; these village deities comprised many 
forms of Pidari, Settaiyar (Jyestha ) 47 and others, 
whose shr ines are called tirumurram as distinguished 
from the Sri Kdyil of the higher pantheon. The 

*•811. ii. Intr., pp. 29-41. 

**ibid; 606 of 1902; 177 Of 1907; and 118 of 1914. 

"Also 66 and 67 of 1913. 

*•207 of 1919. 

"Also 10 of 1898. 



RELIGION 


491 


seven Mothers 48 are mentioned in other inscriptions, 
as also Krsna 49 , Rama, Sita and Laksmana 50 , and 
Hanuman 51 . TiruvorriyGr offered worship to all the 
sixty-three Saiva saints 52 , and Kalahasti kept the 
memory of a local legend fresh in the name of 
a garden called after Kannappar 83 . Ennayiram, a 
strong centre of Vaisnavism, allotted shares from 
the lands of the village to the shrines of §rl- 
Mulasthanam-udaiyar, Sarasvati, Sribhataraki, Maha - ' 
modi, Suryadeva, Saptamatargal, Mahasasta, Durga, 
Jyestha and the gods of the Seris 54 . To complete 

1 * 1 * *t 

the picture of practical popular religion it may be 
added that pilgrimages to specially sacred places 
were known and the charity of some took the 
form of providing amenities for the pilgrims en route 
to and from Tirumalai (Tirupati) 55 . The regular 
sacrifice of a goat on every Tuesday to Mundesvari by 
the Kurava women of the nadu is recorded in a Mysore 
inscription of the time of Rajendra I 56 . 


There is thus not a single element of popular 

Hinduism as we know it now that is not 
represented in the religious practice 
of the tenth and eleventh centuries. Foreign students 


Neo-Hinduism. 


“705 of 1909; 131 Of 189» ( 811 . iii, 66). 
“93 of 1925; 289 of 1897. 

“244 of 1910. 

“335 Of 1906. 

”137 of 1912. 

“125 of 1922. 


“335 of 1917. Sflrya, seven mothers and S&stft are mentioned 
together in 131 of 1892. 

“430 of 1905; 255 of 1915. 

“484 of 1911. 



492 


THE CO^iAS 


of the religious history of India have often been 
puzzled and sometimes irritated by the utter reckless- 
ness with which Hinduism appears to sanction and 
absorb within itself the basest superstitions and devil 
worship as well as the noblest and purest forms of 
worship and meditation 57 . But in religion, as in other 
matters, the aim was to attain, not equality, but 
harmony j to evolve a system in which each person and 
class would find his or its proper place, a foothold from 
which the next step might be taken. The doctrines of 
karma and rebirth were parts of the living faith of the 
whole people, and the inclusion, within the common fold, 
of the more primitive manifestations of the religious 
impulse was but the result of a metaphysic which saw 
in the lowliest human being, in fact, hi any living crea- 
ture, a spark of divinity enveloped in the accidents of 
its own past and working out its way back to its 
pristine purity. The honoured place held by many 
ndyandm and dlvdn> who were not of the priestly class 
by birth, and the story of the pariah saint Nandan 
show that the standard of spiritual values was by no 
means lowered by the admission of primitive faiths 
into the ante-chamber of Hinduism. The aim was 
ever to purify and sublimate the religious impulse, 
though it is probable that, hi the attempt to raise the 
lower forms, the higher ones did not themselves al- 
together escape damage. 

The life of the ascetic strongly appealed to the 

imagination of the people and one of 

Asceticism. .. „ ,, . 

the common forms of religious chanty 

" 7 For an ingenious but perverse explanation of this feature, 
see Trevaskis — The Land of the Five Rivers, p. 57. 



RELIGION 


493 


was to provide for the feeding, regular or occasional, 
of ascetics in temples and mathas. Vaisnavism was 
on the whole moderate in its devotion to the ascetic 
ideal, and did not give rise to the bizarre manifesta- 
tions of it associated with Saivism. The Yaisnava 

• • 

endowments generally provided for the feeding of 3ri- 
Vaisnavas and tadar 5s , or of Brahmins who had a 
perfect mastery of the Veda 69 . And the degenerate 
V aisnavism of the Radha cult was as yet unknown and 
had apparently no vogue in the South at any time. 
Examples of Vaisnava mathas like the Kundavai 
matha at Uttaramerur 00 can be gathered from inscrip- 
tions. Saivism was at this period in marked contrast 

with the advaitism of Sankara, Smarta Hinduism as it 

* 

may be called, and embraced a whole gamut of sec- 
tional groups ranging . from the comparatively mild 
Sivaydgins to the extremely fanatical and repulsive 
groups like the Pasupatas, the Kapalikas, and the 
Kalamukhas. The Sivayogin, as his name implies, 
spent his life meditating upon Siva and seeking release 
from the bonds of mundane life by such meditation ; at 
the approach of death, he is said to bathe his body in 
ashes, utter certain Saiva mantras and worship the 
linga on his chest. Many are the inscriptions 
recording endowments for Sivayogins being fed in 
temples and mathas . 61 The Kalamukhas, also called 

“'333 o£ 1917. 

t9 VMam alagiddga valla Br&hmatyar, 343 of 1917 

60 184 of 1923. 

#1 467 of 1908; 577 of 1920; 227 of 1911; 101 of 1914; 241 of 

1894, etc. 



494 THE CO^AS 

Mahavratins, were perhaps the most extreme sect 
among these, and do not seem to have been very 
different from the Kapalikas. “ The Kalamukhas 
hold that the following are the means for the attain- 
ment of desires concerning this world and the next: — 
(1) eating food in skull; (2) besmearing the 
body with the ashes of a dead body ; (3) eating 
the ashes; (4) holding a club; (5) keeping a pot 
of wine; (6) worshipping the god as seated there- 
in” 02 . From these practices, they were known as 
Mahavratins, “men with the great vows”; they roused 
the disgust of a humane reformer like Ramanuja. 
They appear even to have practised human sacrifices. 63 
The Kalamukhas were widespread in South India in 
the ninth, tenth and eleventh centuries. They did not 
lack support from the princes and the people. The 
Kodumbalur chieftain Vikramakesari, the contempo- 
rary of Parantaka II, constructed the three temples 
( v i m ana-tray am) known as Muvarkovil, and then he 
presented a big matha ( brhmi-matham ) to the glorious 
Mallikarjuna of the Atreya gotra, a man from 
Madhura, versed in the Veda and the sisya of Yidya- 
rasl and Taporasi ; to that chief ascetic of the 
Kalamukhadana, his guru, the Yadava (Vikrama- 
kesari) also gave eleven gramas attached to the matha 
for the regular feeding of fifty Asita-valdra ascetics. 64 
Earlier than the date of this record from Pudukkottah, 
is one from Vedal (North Arcot) which mentions the 

**Bhandarkar, op. cit., p. 127. 

••Gopinatba Rao, op* at. 

• 4 Fd. No. 14. See also PK. pp. 116*7* 



RELIGION 


495 


Kalamukha Dasapuriyan of the Harita gotra and 

the Apastamba sutra 65 . At Melpadi, in the same part 

of the country, there was a matha of the Kalamukhas 

of which the head was called Lakulisvara-Pandita 66 . 

• • 

There was another at Tiruvorfiyur presided over by 
Caturanana Pandita 07 . In the reign of Virarajendra, 
an inscription from Jambai (South Arcot) mentions 
a Mahavratin Lakullsvara Pandita among the autho- 
rities of the local temple. A Kalamukha Gomadattu 
Arulala Bhattan sold some land to the temple at Kdyil 
Tevarayanpettai ( Tan j ore district) in A.D. 1123 68 . 
Other Kalamukhas of the same spiritual lineage, 
bearing the names Sail arasi and Jnanarasi, are men- 
tioned as endowing lamps or taking charge of sucli 
endowments in the temple of Tiruvanaikkoyil 
(Chingleput) in the years 1127, 1205 and 1231 69 . All 
these instances point to the extent and continuity of the 
influence of the Kalamukhas on South Indian Saivism 
under the Colas. It may be doubted, however, if the 
members of the sects who were connected with the 
temples and perhaps conducted worship in them, 
actively practised the tenets attributed to them. In 
the absence of contemporary literary evidence on such 
questions, we lack the means of determining this 
satisfactorily. 

0'85 of 1908. 

*•85 of 1889. 

•’177, 181 of 1912, etc. 

•*247 of 1923. 

••360, 357, 352 Of 1911. 



496 


THE CO^AS 


The career of one of the Caturanana Panditas™ 

of the Tiruvorriyur matha is rather 
A pa^ite? ana fully described in an inscription of the 

time of Kannaradeva, and deserves to 
be noticed in some detail as affording an interesting 
and authentic instance of the kind of motives that sent 
people into a life of ascetic renunciation. Born of a 
family of local chieftains in Kerala, Valabha who 
resembled Guha and was possessed of many great 
qualities, mastered all the arts and sciences in his boy- 
hood and, in the prime of life, bent on service to the 
world, he reached the Cola country and came to be 
closely associated with king Rajaditya as his guru , 
friend and sdmanta 71 . As, in spite of their proximity, 

,0 Names like Lakuli&vara and Caturanana are titles rather than 
personal names. Failure to grasp this fact firmly has led to some 
confused writing. Fleet made the mistake of supposing that the 
founder of Pasupata was the same as Lakuli&a of the Mclpagi inscrip- 
tions, (El. v. p. 228; contra Gopinatha Rao, op. at pp. 17 ff), who 
is again identified with his namesake of Jambai (ARE. 3907, IT, 39). 
The latter identification is not, like the former, a chronological impossi- 
bility; but it is improbable that the same man was in charge of 
important religious duties at Melpadi and Jambai about the same time. 
The Tiruvoxxiyiir inscriptions leave no manner of doubt that Caturanana 
was the title of the head of the local matli a borne by a succession of 
persons who held the office. 

”181 of 1912. ARE. 1913, II, 17. The grantha portion of the 
inscription which gives the account of the early career of Caturanana is 
much damaged and not easy to interpret. I have given above what 
appears to me to be the proper rendering of the first two verses. The first 
vers© is very elliptical, and though it contains the words vallabha 
sam&hvaya rd$tra~n&t?idt and samabhavad-valabhi 5, there is nothing in it 
to indicate a friendship between the future Caturanana and Kj*§pa III 
(Vallabha). The suggestion is no more than a conjecture, and so long 
as it was believed that Rajaditya was killed in a treacherous manner 

(see discussion on Bisugeye ka\andgi of the Atakilr inscription, ante i, 
p. 169, n), the conjecture had a certain plausibility which it now lacks 
altogether. As I understand it, Caturanana renounced the worldly life 
not out of remorse for treachery to his spiritual pupil, friend and 
temporal master, but simply out of disgust ( virdgatd ) born of his 
separation from him by his death on the field, as is clear from the 
phrase; smnidMnd^^akamarai^sukharn samyitgc Ulna ndptah. One 
wonders if this main was the same as VeUangumaran, the K§raja general 
of Rajaditya, who built the Siva temple at Gramam (735 of 1905), and 
was the most prominent among the numberless KSrata servants of 
Rajaditya. .... 



RELIGION 


497 


he did not have the pleasure of dying with his friend 
on the battle-field, he smarted that his life was not in 
keeping with his birth and connections, and became 
indifferent to the things of the world. Then he bathed 
in the Ganges, and turned ascetic at Tiruvorriyur, 
obtaining his vrata-s from Niranjana guru and becoming 
a Mahavratin, Caturanana by name, and head of the 
local matha. The inscription which gives this account 
is dated in the twentieth year of Kannaradeva who 
took Kacci and Tanjai, about A. D. 960, when he had 
made himself master of the northern districts of the 
Cola kingdom as a result of his invasion. 


The ascetics owned no property themselves; but 

' 1 \ ( 

their organisations, the monasteries ( mathas ), often 
owned vast estates devoted to their maintenance and 
the encouragement of learning and the arts. What 
proportion of the population led such a life of pious, 
if not uneasy, poverty, and whether it was a larger 
one than at present, it is of course difficult to deter- 
mine. The times were quite favourable to the ascetic 
ideal, and all religious systems in the country 
applauded it. Asceticism was twice blessed; he who 
turned ascetic and he who did not do so, but remained 
householder, alike gained by it. Both accumulated 
religious merit, for the householder was assured of 
a good berth in the other world as much for his gifts 
(dana), as the aseetie for his ^enunciation apd 
Austerity. There was no doubt many a pious fraud 
masquerading under the garb of asceticism that often 
afforded the occasion for a good joke among the 
populace whose common sense was seldom slow in 
K— 63 



498 


THE COJjAS 


detecting such cases. But the modern attitude which, 
in the holy name of economics, counts each man as 
a hand, and looks upon a mendicant as an idle hand, 
was altogether unknown. And in spite of its excesses 
and aberrations, the ascetic ideal has done great good 
to the people by stressing the higher values of the 
spirit, and by giving them a ready-made philosophy 
with which to face the hard realities of life. It is 
still cherished by the masses of the people, in the 
villages, though not so much in the cities. 

The history of the mathas and guhais 72 of the 

period cannot be pursued in any 

Mathas and detail here. Their origin is anterior 
giihitfs. | 0 £h e rgjgn Rajaraja I 7S and their 

number and influence steadily increased 
during the period of Cola rule in South India. 
Starting from important centres where one or more 
mathas were established in the first instance, the 
movement spread all over the land until almost every 
temple came to possess one or more mathas function- 
ing in close proximity to it. They grouped themselves 
from the beginning round a few prominent centres 
and in course of time, a limited number of santanas, 
spiritual groups attached to particular successions of 
gurus, came to be distinguished; examples of such 
santanas are that of the mudaliydrs of Tiruccatti- 
murram 74 and the maligai-madattu mudaliydr santdnam 

** ‘Guhai’ means, according to the old Tamil lexicon, the Pingalam , 
a place where ascetics reside ( munivar iruppifaim), a monastery. 
Vide Tamil Lexicon s.v. Guhai . 

»* Contra ARE. 1909 II, 53. Tiruv&dutuyai (111 of 1925) and 
Tiruvon'iyhr (181 of 1912) are among the earliest places where mathas 
came up. See also ARE. 1911, II, 31 for a brief notice of some mathas. 

"392 of 1908. 



RELIGION 


499 


of Tiruvidaimarudil 75 . Many of these groups were 
confined to the Tamil country in the range of their 
activity; these were the Tamil Saiva mathas proper. 
Others, however, kept up wider contacts and prided 
themselves on their connection with Aryadesam, 
Benares, or even Kashmir; the Golaki matha had also 
a considerable following in the South. Generally, 
the mathas which maintained these external contacts 
belonged to the various schools of Pasupatas, Kapalikas 
and so on. There must have been monastic institu- 

* L l * ' * 

tions of other types maintained by Saiva Brahmins 

^ f , t * ' 

and Vaisnavas, though of these we learn relatively 
little from the inscriptions. 

One instance of a matha in which provision was 
made for the convenience of pilgrims deserves special 
mention. A record from Govindaputtur dated 
A. D. 1248 76 , mentions that Subrahmanya Siva of 
Cidambaram (Yyaghrapuri), a grandson of a certain 
well known Kandhabharana, purchased land from 
several persons and created an endowment for certain 
specific services to be undertaken by the Tiruttondat- 
togaiyan-tiru-madam situated in the temple of 
Tiruvisaiyamangai at Govindaputtur. Among the 
services to be undertaken with the proceeds of the land 
were the supply of salt and castor oil to pilgrims, and 
medical help for those among the disciples who fell 
ill and had no one to look after them. It is also of 
interest to note that Subrahmanya Siva, evidently also 
the head of the matha , laid it down that his successors 

’•49 Of 1911. 

’•192 of 1929. 



500 


THE CO^AS 


duly appointed by him for the administration of the 
matlia at the end of his life were to carry on this 
arrangement, and in case he died without choosing his 
successor, he was to be chosen by the head of another 
matka at Cidambaram (also called Tiruttonuattogai- 
yan-tirumadam) and that the new head so chosen was 
to carry on the arrangements under that particular 
endowment. It is possible that similar provisions for 
general amenities, besides feeding and teaching, 
commonly undertaken by these institutions, obtained 
elsewhere ; but we have no definite knowledge of them. 
It has been pointed out that sometimes even animals 
were attended to in similar institutions, and an 
instance from the Travancore country has been 
cited 77 . 


A kalaham. 


Before leaving the mathas, attention must be 

drawn to a popular riot described 
in a record of the second year of 
Rajaraja III 78 as g uhai-idi-kalaham, a revolt in which 
monasteries were demolished. This occurred in the 
twenty-second regnal year of Kulottunga III, 
A. D. 1200, and in it, the property belonging to a guhdi 
in Tirutturaipundi suffered badly. The causes of 

* | f ^ 

this demonstration are not stated and we cannot even 
say whether it was directed against this particular 
guhai or guhais in general; on the later assumption, 
it is indeed very strange that we hear nothing more of 
it than this casual reference to it 70 . 


"ARE. 1929, II, 39; TAR. 1920-21, p. 61. 
”471 of 1912. 

’•Contra ABE. 1913, II, 42. 



RELIGION 


501 


^ In the long peiiod of Cola rule the Hindu temple 

attained the zenith of its influence on 

The temple* the the social life of the country. It 

ceased to be a small structure of brick 
and mortar providing a centre of simple worship 
attended by the villagers. The new idea of the stone 
temple found room for the employment of much skill 
and taste in its planning and decoration. With its 
rise, there came up also a varied and complex routine 
in each temple sustained by the rich accumulations in 
land and gold, the result of pious gifts, offered with 
a generosity and administered with a care to which 
we have long become strangers. Each generation 
husbanded with caution what was handed down to it, 
and by means of fresh additions, managed to leave a 
richer heritage to its successor. The vast and growing 
wealth of the temples brought them into more and 
more intimate business relations with the neighbour- 
hood. And in Tanjore, there rose under Rajaraja’s 

r 

eye, as under a magician ’s wand, the marvellous Great 
Temple which surpassed everything effected elsewhere 
by generations of effort. Not only did its stately 
plan ensure for it an abiding place as the master- 
piece of south Indian Temple architecture, but the 
elaborate arrangements made for the management of 
the affairs of the temple and carefully recorded in the 
inscriptions on its walls, summed up the best practices 
of the time in this regard and set a model for the 
future. A deliberate^ desire to bring the temple into 
intimate touch with several aspects of the life of 
the people marks almost every one of these arrange- 
ments. As the Great Temple adorned the capital 



502 


THE! CO^AS 


city of the whole empire, and as it was the foundation 
of the greatest monarch of Southern India, the range 
of its contacts was naturally much wider than that of 
an average temple; but almost every temple, however 
small in size and restricted in influence, w T as a 
miniature of the Great Temple and had its counter- 
part of every feature of the larger institution. 


The Great Temple of Tan j ore was easily the 

richest temple of the time. The king 


The Great 
Temple. 


alone had by the twenty-ninth year of 
his reign presented to it a vast amount 


of gold and treasure in the form of ornaments, jewels 
and vessels. Much of it was booty that fell to him as 


a result of his wars. The quantity of gold of which 
account has been preserved amounted to over 41,500 
Kalanjus, or, taking a Kalanju to be about 70 grains, 
well over 500 lbs. troy. The value of jewels presented 
was about 10,200 Kdsus, equal to half as many 
Kalanjus, in gold 80 . Of silver he gave 50,650 
Kalanjus, over 600 lbs. troy. He set apart lands in 
several villages throughout his dominions, including 
Ceylon, yielding an annual income of 116,000 Kalams 
of paddy, equal at the then prevailing prices 81 to 58,000 
Kdsus, besides a cash income of 1,100 Kdsus. For the 
service of the temple, four hundred hetaerae were 
impressed from among those of the other temples in the 
country, and they were assigned each a pangu (share) 
comprising a house and one Veli of land yielding a net 
revenue of 100 Kalams of paddy a year. About 180 


“SI I. li, 38, paragraph 48. 
• '811. li, p. 68. 



RELIGION 


508 


such shares were set apart further for the maintenance 
of as many as 212 men servants comprising dancing 
masters, musicians, drummers, tailors, goldsmiths, 
accountants and so on. Among these were three 
persons to sing the Ariyam and four others the Tamil, 
apparently the two systems of music called ahamdrgam 
and desi elsewhere 82 . There was constituted also a 
choir of fifty persons for reciting the Tiruppadiyam 
to the accompaniment of musical instruments; the 
choir had the power to fill vacancies by co-option in 
case any of them died or migrated elsewhere leaving 
behind no relative suitable to take his place ; the daily 
remuneration for each of them was fixed at three 
Kurunis of paddy-corn 83 . Rajaraja’s elder sister 
Kundavai presented to the temple gold of the weight 
of nearly 10,000 Kalanjus and utensils of the value of 
18,000 Kasus. Others, queens and high officials and 
regiments of soldiers, made other gifts recorded with 
equal care and precision on the temple walls and 
pillars. All the cash endowments amounting to 
several thousands of Kasus were loaned out to 
numerous village assemblies at i*ates of interest fixed 
in kind or money, and generally ranging about 12% 
per annum. Camphor, cardamom-seeds, campak-buds 
and cuscus-roots, for instance, were provided for 
in this manner by means of cash endowments. 83 ® 

In fact, the place of the Great Temple in the eco- 
nomy of the capital city and of the empire can hardly 

“360 of 1907; 211 of 1912. 
il, 65. 

•*«A lamp of gh! and camphor to be maintained in the temple of 
Sauripperumaj at Tirukkappapuram required, in A.D. 1129, an 
endowment of 20 kafafijus in gold, (509 of 1922). 



504 


THE CO^AS 


be exaggerated. Its construction must have extended 
over many years and furnished employment for the 
best architects and sculptors of the land during these 
years, besides a vast number of common labourers. 
The accurate and detailed descriptions of the nume- 
rous icons, some of them cast in the form of complex 
groups of figures in attitudes illustrating the favourite 
themes of legend, give the impression of a high state of 
efficiency attained in the art of casting metals and of 
a more or less constant and profitable employment 
for the skilled artisans. The account, equally minute 
and complete, of the ornaments and jewels with which 
the images were decked testifies to the superior excel- 
lence reached in the art of the goldsmith, and the extent 
to which it was promoted by a rich temple. And as a 
matter of course, every temple, great or small, held in 
relation to its neighbourhood exactly the same position 
that the Great Temple had in the capital. The 
difference was only one of degree. As landholder, 
employer, and consumer of goods and services, as' 
bank, school and museum, as hospital and theatre, in 
short, as a nucleus which gathered round itself all that 
was best in the arts of civilised existence and regu- 
lated them with the humaneness bom of the sprit of 
Dharma, the mediaeval Indian temple has few parallels 
in the annals of mankind. The examples of searching 
periodical inquests by the highest officers of the 
central government, sometimes by the king himself, 
into the management and affairs of the temples, that 
are recorded in the inscriptions, show that the Cola 
government realised the increasing social importance 
pf the role of the temple and the need for the exercise 



RELIGION 


505 


of a steady and vigilant control on the business side 
of its affairs 84 . 

By the side of Saivism and Vaisnavism and the 

\ 

' , , the other forms taken by Hinduism to 

Jainism. * . 

which attention has been drawn, Jai- 
nism had a fair following and enjoyed the patronage 
of the princes and people, though not to the same extent 
as the orthodox creeds. The pallic-candam, the land 
of the palli (.Taina temple), was a recognised category 

of tax-free land known to the revenue accounts of the 
time. Tamil literature was greatly enriched by the 
writings of Jain authors, and legend avers that as late 
as the middle of the twelfth century !§ekkilar was 
goaded into the composition of his magnificant ‘Lives 
of the Saints’ ( Periya-puntnam ) by king Kulottunga II 
seeking literary enjoyment in the verses of the 
Slvaka-& inddmani, a secular kdvya in Tamil by a Jain 
author. Vestiges of Jainism have been discovered in 
the Travancore country which, though undated, may 
with some confidence be assigned to the period extend- 
ing from the tenth to the thirteenth centuries 85 . And 
the Co]a inscriptions contain noteworthy references to 
Jain centres in the Tamil districts. The Udayendiram 
plates of Hastimalla record that the Digambara Jains 
had an ancient pallio-candam comprising two pattis 
of land which were specifically excluded from the gift 
of the village of Kadaikkottur made in the reign of 

8 4 Details of such instances are cited in my paper on The Economy 
of a South Indian Temple in the Cdla Period in the Maiaviya 
Commemoration Volume. 

8 *!TAS. li, pp. 125 ff. 

K — 64 



506 


THE COfcAS 


Parantaka I 86 . There wasatVedal (N. Arcot) a large 
Jain monastery in which some dispute arose between 
one nun and her five hundred pupils on the one 
part and four hundred nuns on the other, and was put 
an end to only by the lay Jains of t'he place taking 
under their protection one of the parties to the dis- 
pute 87 . This was about A.D. 885. At Slrramur in 
South Arcot an inscription of the seventeenth year of 
a Rajakesari records the provision of a lamp in the 
mandapa of the temple of Pa.rsvana.tha in which the 
scripture was expounded 88 . A certain Gangasura- 
pperumballi of Rajendrapuram finds mention in a 
record from Tirakkol (K. Arcot) 89 ; and a Kanaka- 
senabhatara who had the palli is found at Sendalai in 
the twelfth year of a Parakesari 90 . At Anandamanga- 
lam in the Chingleput district, on a boulder which 
bears in a line the sculptures of three groups of Jaina 
figures, is found engraved a record which provides for 
the daily feeding of one adigal in the Jinagirip-palli 91 . 
This record is dated A.D. 945 in the reign of Paran- 
taka I. In the same year, a pupil of Aristanemibha- 
tara, of the big Jain settlement of Tiruppanmalai, 
Pattinik-kuratti-adigal by name, caused a well to 
be dug at Vijappakkam, and the well and a 
house were constituted into a nunnery, under the 
supervision of ‘the twenty-four’ of the place 92 . In the 

•• 811 . ii, 76, w. 27-8. 

•• 811 . ill, 92. 

**201 of 1902. 

”277 Of 1916. 

”7 Of 1899. 

”430 of 1922. 

of 1900. Possibly the 24 formed a local Jain assembly, the 
number bein# that of the Tirthankaras. 



RELIGION 


607 


seventeenth year of Rajaraja, two lamps were endowed 
by a land grant to the big monastery ( periya-palli ) in 
Tirunarungondai, a pallic-candam in South Arcot. 93 
Tirumalai near Polur in North Arcot, and Tirumala- 
vadi in the Trichinopoly district where Kundavai built 
a Jain temple are other great Jain centres of the time 94 . 
At Tirupparuttikkunram, a suburb of Kancipuram, 
there is a celebrated Jain shrine to this day. This 
place is often called Jina Kanci, and its Bsisamudaya, 
congregation of monks, is said to have purchased some 
land about A.D. 1116 95 , and the same samuddya is just 
mentioned in another inscription of a slightly later 
date in the reign of Yikrama Cola 96 . An undated 
inscription of the reign of Kulottunga I records a 
gift of land to a perumballi (big Jain temple), called 
after the king’s name, at Kuhur, in the Tanjore 
district 07 . Two other pallis are mentioned in an 
inscription of A. D. 1194 from Maruttuvakkudi, 
Tanjore district 98 . The settlement at Jina-Kanci is 
once more mentioned in A.D. 1199, when Kurukkal- 
candraklrtti and some others are said to have exerted 
themselves to secure the grant of a pallic-canda 
imiyili for this important shrine. 08 * 

Facts like these raise a warning against a whole- 
sale acceptance of the stories of the persecution and 

•*385 of 1902. 

“SII. i, 67 and 68. Kundavai built another Jain temple at D&d&- 
puram. (ante p. 486). 

•'382 of 1929. 

”381 at 1929. 

•’288 of 1917. 

”392 Of 1907. 

”*43 of 1890. 



508 


THE COfcAS 


extirpation of Jainism and Buddhism, so freely 
retailed in the hagiology of the Hindu sects. 

^Buddhism does not seem to figure as much in the 

epigraphy of the period as Jainism. 

Buddhism. rpjjg celebrated Leyden grant indeed 

records the gift of a whole village to the Bauddha 
Vihdra of Cuclamani-V armadeva in Negapatam, and 
this grant was supplemented by a fresh gift in the 
reign of Kulottunga I, on a representation made 
by the king of Kadaram through his ambassadors. 
And the Vaisnava legends have preserved a curious 
story of Tirumangai Alvar having despoiled the 
Bauddha Vihdra of Negapatam of a solid golden 
image of the Buddha in order to find the funds 
required for building the great Ranganatha temple at 
Srirangam ; possibly this legend only means that at 
the time the lives of the Alvars were put together, in 
the twelfth century A.D., Negapatam was still a strong 
centre of Buddhism which attracted popular attention 
by its wealth and influence. Some relics of Buddhism 
have been traced in Kancipuram 99 and it is quite 
possible that Kancipuram which was one of the great 
centres of Hinduism and J ainism also accommodated a 
Buddhist colony in these days. Sri Mulavasam in 
Malabar, on almost the same latitude as Negapatam on 
the opposite coast, was another well known centre of 
Buddhism whose influence was felt from very early 
times in places as far from it as Oandhara 100 . A more 
systematic search for Buddhist antiquities in Southern 

’•/a., 44, p. 127. 

»«*ras. ii, p. in. 



RELIGION 


509 


India than has yet been undertaken my reveal other 
centres of that religion not now known to us. 
Buddhist writers also contributed to the growth of 
Tamil Literature, though not to the same extent as 
Jains. All the same, epigraphy and literature alike 
produce the impression that in the tenth and eleventh 
centuries of the Christian era, Buddhism was less 
popular in the Tamil country than Jainism, and it 
seems probable that in the religious controversies of 
the preceding age, Buddhism suffered more damage 
and lost its hold on the people of the country more 
completely than Jainism. 


The picture of religious life in the country is 

thus a complex one. There was a 

harmony perpetual stirring and mixing together 

of various creeds each influencing 
the others and being influenced in turn. As a result of 


this long process of assimilation, the Buddhist 
vlhcira, the Jain palli, and the Hindu temple presented 
many similarities in their worship, organisation and 
festivities in the midst of equally striking differences ; 
and the ideals of asceticism and renunciation made a 
common appeal to all these religions alike. On the 
whole the religious differences of the time, such as 
they were, did not tend to produce social discord, and 
a general attitude of mutual tolerance, if not respect, 
seems to have been well sustained. 



512 


THE CO^AS 


The names of some works have been preserved 

casually in the inscriptions ; these 
Lost poems. works are altogether unknown other- 
wise ; they were once considered 
worthy of public recognition, but having no access to 
the works themselves, we are not in a position to 
decide if the recognition was a homage to their 
literary excellence or was the result of other causes, 
local or personal. However that may be, the names 
of these works and the occasions for their being 
mentioned in inscriptions give us some idea of the 
extent of popular interest in literary productions and 
of the types of literature that commanded popularity. 
Rajaraja I, perhaps the greatest emperor of the line, 
was the subject of two works, a drama and a Kdvya. 
They are the Rajamjesvara-nataJtam and the 
Rdjardja-vijayam 1 ; the former was to be enacted in 
the great Tan j ore temple during festivals and the 
latter was to be read in the temple at Tiruppundurutti, 
and endowments were created to provide for both. It 
is not certain if these works were in Tamil or Sanskrit ; 


it seems probable that the ndtakam was not a drama 
based on Rajaraja’s life, but rather a dramatic 
representation of the construction of the great temple 
itself, if it was not merely an attempt to popularise 
some Saiva legends. The Rdjardja-V i jay am might 
have been a quasi-historical poem treating of 
Rajaraja’s reign. In any case, both the works must 
have contained several allusions, if not accurate 
descriptions, of some of the most striking episodes in 


J B1I. ii, p. 806; 120 of 1931. ARE. 1931, II, 12. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


513 


Rajaraja’s life, and the loss of these works is indeed 
much to be regretted. Kulottunga I was the subject 
of another work, Kulottunga-Cola-caritai, by Tiruna- 
rayana-bhatta, also called Kavi-kumuda-candra, a 
pandit from Manakulasanicceri in Tribliuvani, and the 
poet was given as reward (.s arJcdram) land of the 
extent of half a nilam and two ma-s by the sabha, of the 
village, the land being always assessable only at the 
rate prevailing for the twelfth grade. The award was 
made by the sabha in accordance with an order from 
the king requiring them to adjudge the Icawya and 
reward' the author suitably 2 . Two inscriptions from 
Cuddalore, South Arcot, dated 1111 and 1119 A.D., 
record gifts of tax-free land in recognition of a 
sthalapurana and a nataka (based on local legends) 
composed by a certain Kamalalaya Bhatta ; the works 
were called Kannivana-purdnam and Pdm-puliyur- 
nddagam, names which seem to imply that they were 
Tamil works of a popular character 3 . In endowing a 
lamp at Tiruvalangadu, North Arcot, in 1210 A. D., 
the donor, Aranilaivisakhan Trailokvamallan Yatsa- 
raj an of Arumbakkam, describes himself as a person 
who rendered the Bliarata in elegant Tamil and 
discovered the path of Siva 4 . In 1146 a certain 
Marudattur-udaiyan states that he gave to the temple 
at Nangupatti some land which he had received from 
Vedavanamudaiyan of Paiyyur whom he had 
celebrated in verse 5 . Two other instances occur in 

*198 Of 1919. 

*129, 128 Of 1902. 

4 Pdradandannai arundamilppa$uttuc~civaneri-kan$a f 4S2 of 1905. 

*335 of 1914; Pd. 129 ; — ndn kavi pa^i pdtfina kavikku enakku pariMl 
tanda tan kCmiy&na kudikkd4u % 

K— G5 



514 


THE CO^AS 


inscriptions which, though doubtless of the Cola 
period, cannot be more precisely dated as the names 
of the kings in whose reigns the records were engraved 
are not given. When the king was witnessing a dance 
by Pungoyil-nayakat-talaikkoli in one of the pavilions 
in the temple at Tiruvartir, he was pleased to order 
the gift of some iraiyili land in the brahmadeya 
village Yayarrur to Pungoyil Nambi who had 
celebrated a feudatory of the king (■ nammagan ), 
Ylrasola Anukkan, in a poem called Viranukka- 
vijayam 6 ; evidently the Nambi and the talaikkoli were 
ministering in the same shrine. Lastly, the officers of. 
the treasury of the temple of Tiruvallam gave away 1 00 
kulis from the temple lands to Yaradayap-pulavar of 
Kuratti who had composed the Vallai-andadi , a poem 
in praise of the local deity in which each verse began 
with the concluding words or syllables or letters of the 
preceding one 6 '. These examples of forgotten poems 
mentioned in the inscriptions, and nowhere else, attest 
the existence of a fairly widespread literary activity 
of a popular character. When we add to this, the list 
of poems and other works fragments of which are 
preserved in the older commentaries and glosses, we 
may safely conclude that much excellent work has been 
lost beyond recovery. This is true to some extent of 
the ancient literature of any country; but with regard 
to South India, the impression is hard to resist that 
this loss has been very considerable and that, with 

•548 Of 1904. 

•*233 of 1921. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE C6pAS 


515 


some remarkable exceptions, the survivals have been 
the result more of caprice and accident than of 
deliberate choice or of an active literary criticism. 

About the close of Pandya-Pallava period must 

be placed the important Tamil version 

Peruneadai ^ x 

of the Brhat-katha, Perungadai or 
Udayanan Kadai by the poet who is known by the 
name Kongu-velir, the vel (chieftain) of Kongu. 
Very little is known of his life; a verse in a recent 
work, Kongu-mandalasatakam states that he was a 
native of Mangai, which has been identified with 
Vijayamangalam in the Erode Taluq of the 
Coimbatore district. Adiyarkku-nallar, the celebrated 
annotator of the Silappadikdram, has said that 
Udayanan Kadai was based on a study of several 
works of the age of the second Sangam; from this 
the conclusion has been drawn that this work may 
date from the third century A.D. or earlier 7 . This is, 
however, by no means certain; all that we can say is 
that in the days of Adiyarkkunallar in the twelfth 
century A.D., this belief was current about Udayanan- 
kadai s . On the other hand, it is the opinion of 
Svaminatha Aiyar, the great scholar to whom 
we owe a masterly edition of all that has 
survived of this work 9 , that it was indebted to the 
Sanskrit version known to have been made by 
the Ganga ruler Durvinlta in the sixth century 
A.D. The story of Udayana is very well known 

VRAS., 1906, pp. 689-92. 

•V, Svaminatha Aiyar, Perungadai , p. xxviii, cf» Lacote Guq,d#hya 
and the Bfhat Kathd (Tr. by Tabard, 1923), p. 148* 

9 op, cit, , p. vili, a* 



616 


THE! cO^iAS 


and need not be detailed here; of the adventures of 
his son, Naravahana, the most original part of 
Gunadhya’s work, the Perungadai in its extant parts 
knows little. These comprise a hundred sections of 
varying length, the shortest being about fifty lines and 
the longest a little over two hundred. The metre is 
ahaval, a very flexible type, analogous to blank verse in 
English, and most suited for narrative poetry. The 
style of the author is very chaste and direct, and the 
poem rightly takes a high rank among the literary 
classics of the Tamil world. 


The Slvakasvnddmani of the Jain poet Tiruttakka- 

deva is counted as the greatest among 
Sindamai>i. niahdkuvyas of Tamil literature. 

As it is seen to follow the Ksattraciiddmani of 
Vadlbhasimha, itself based on the V ttarapuruna of 
Gunabhadra composed in A.D. 898 10 , there can be 

little doubt that the & 'indamani was composed some- 
time in the tenth century 11 . ' N accinarkkiniyar states 
that the author was born of the race of the Colas 12 . 
A later tradition cherished by Tamil Jains adds that 
after a full course of study in Tamil and Sanskrit, he 
turned an ascetic at a relatively early age and went 
to Madura to live there for sometime in the company 
of the great poets of the Tamil Sangam. While 
admitting the distinction earned by Jain writers in 
the line of religious and holy literature, these poets 


10 K$attracii4&niatyi ed. T. S. Kuppuswami Sastri, (1903), p. 3 of the 

introduction. 

^SlvakaMnddmatti, p. 11, n. 6en Tamil, v. pp. 98 ff. 

3143. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


517 


challenged their capacity in general, and that of 
Tiruttakkadevar in particular, to contribute to the 
literature of Love. The ascetic poet took up the 
challenge, and having satisfied his guru that he would 
not lose his spiritual balance if he was permitted to 
produce an erotic poem, he composed the big poem on 
the life of Jivakan, the subject prescribed by his 
master. The result pleased the guru; but it did not 
give the quietus to the critics of the 6 an gam, who, 
unable to deny the merits of the poem, now raised a 
suspicion against the character of its author, saying 
that one who had no experience of sex-life could not 
have produced it; Tinittakkadevar then demonstrated 
the purity of his devotion to the ascetic ideal by means 
of an ordeal. We may not accept these tales as history, 
especially because there is nothing in the poem of 
Tiruttakkadevar that cannot be explained on the 
simple supposition that the Jain poet wanted to set 
forth in Tamil one of the most romantic and edifying 
cycles of tales preserved in the Puranas of the Jainas. 

The life story of Jivaka is that of an ideal hero, 
equally distinguished in the arts of war and peace, the 
perfect saint no less than the charming lover. After 
a stormy youth marked by many adventures, Jivaka 
finds himself in the prime of life the monarch of a 
splendid kingdom; for some years thereafter he lives 
a life of pleasure in the company of the eight splendid 
queens whom he had espoused at different times earlier 
in life; in fact, the Sindamani is also called Mana-nul, 
the Book of Marriages, on account of each of 
Jivaka ’s adventures culminating in a happy marriage. 



618 


THE COJ.AS 


Jivaka is shaken from his complacency by an incident, 
trivial in itself, but full of deep significance to him. He 
sees in a moment’s flash the hollowness of human life 

and the wisdom of seeking release from its bonds. He 
installs his son on the throne and seeks the peace of 
the forest, and attains salvation in the end. 

In its present form the poem contains 3,145 
stanzas, each stanza being made up of four lines. It is 
said that the author actually composed only 2,700 
stanzas, the remaining 445 being later additions by his 
guru, with whose peimission he wrote the poem, and 
by another hand 13 . The annotator has marked out 
two verses as those of the guru, but there is no means 
of identifying the additions of the other writer 
mentioned above, if there were such additions. The 
art of Tiruttakkadevar is marked by all the qualities 
of great poetry and has, as is well-known, furnished the 

model for even the genius of Kamban. We shall see 
that it also inspired, though indirectly, the composition 
of the Periya-Purdnam. 

It seems probable that two other mahakavyas, 
the Valaiydpati and the Kundalakesi, known so far 
only by fragments cited in other works, were both 
composed more or less about the same time as the 
£iridamani. The Kundalakesi, it may be noted, is one 
of the few known Buddhist Tamil works besides the 
Manimekalai. 

1 •Naccinarkkiniyar on v. 3143 and n. on p. 914 by Sv&min&tba AIyar s 



LITERATURE UNDER THE 


519 


The Kalladam is a poem of Kalladanar, the work 

KaiiMam. an< * the author alike taking the name of 

a place 14 , possibly the birth-place of the 

poet. He must have been different from the Sangam 
poet of the same name, five of whose songs figure 
in the Purananum 15 , and others in the Ahananuno 
and Kurandogai. There is a tradition that the author 
of the Kalladam chose one hundred verses from the 
Tiruccirrambalak-kovai as the basis for his work, and 
this may well have been so. The work is written in a 
peculiar style, the result of the author’s forced attempt 
to revive the poetic forms and diction of the Sangam 
age. The whole poem is thus a curious instance 
of extreme pedantry. It comprises a hundred 
pieces, each purporting to depict a particular mood 
of love ( Ahatturai ). The formalised, schematic and 
rather soulless treatment of love in the Kovai type 
• appears, to a modern mind, enough in itself to spoil the 
chances of real literature; our author has imposed 
further shackles on himself by tying himself up to a 
selection of verses from the Tirulc-kovai and by 
his deliberate effort to write in an idiom unnatural 
in his age; and there is no evidence to suggest that the 
author meant it to be a mere burlesque or parody ; in 

"Kallityattiik-kalandinidaruli, Tintv&tiagam ( Klrtti , 1. 11). 

16 One of these (385) is in celebration of Aruvandai, the chief of 
Ambar in the Tanjore district. This chief may have been the patron of 
the author of S§ndan Divakaram ; R. Raghava Aiyangar (Sen Tamil 
v. pp. 114 ff.) has argued that the Divakaram was composed more than 
1800 years ago. On the other hand, S. Vaiyapuri Pillai (Ndma-Deepa- 
Nighatyfu, p. iv) suggests that the Aruvandai of the Divdkaram might 
have been a descendant of the Aruvandai of the Puran&nupi , and 
proposes the first half of the eighth century as the date of the 
Divdkaram, 



520 


THE COJAS 


fact it is too serious for that, and the story is that the 
excellence of the Tirukkovai was demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the Sangam only by this effort of 
Kalladanar. The decay of taste and the failure to 
reach a proper standard of literary criticism and 
maintain it, is best seen in the admiration in which this 
stilted composition has been held by generations of 
scholars and poets in recent times . 16 

Kalladanar was fully acquainted with the cycle of 
iSaiva legends centring round Madura 16 *, and refers to 
the miracles wrought by fiiva oh account of 
Manikkavasagar, Barumi, Idaikkadar and others. It 
is probable that the Tirnkkannappadevar Tirumaram 

included in the eleventh section of the &aiva canon was 
also his work. There is no definite evidence on the 
age of the Kalladam ; it may be as early as the tenth 
century, or it may be much later. It is a safe 
assumption that in any case it belongs to the age of the 
Imperial Colas. 

The Kalmgattupparani composed by the poet 

laureate Jayangondar towards the close 
Kal parani UP ' rei ff n of Kulottunga I is the 

earliest and best of the paranis 
accessible to us. It is a splendid little masterpiece. 
The line between history and fictitious convention is 
very clearly seen throughout the poem ; and the poet's 

*«The saying is: KallG,$am karjravaniftattu $olldddd$; this may be 
true in a sense different from the one intended. The work, it should be 
noted, is not cited by any of the great commentators. 

‘••Kflflaxp&divaru m&dajrpariyOn 
ettettiyaflriya kaftamar 6adaiy5n — 95. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE CO^AS 


621 


mastery of a choice diction, and the . sustained 
harmony between the metres employed and the inci- 
dents portrayed, are unique in the whole range of 
Tamil literature. The parani is the war poem 
par excellence and depicts not only the pomp and 
circumstance of war, but all the gruesome details of the 
field. It may be noted in passing that the Kalinga 
war of Kulottunga seems to have been the theme of 
several literary efforts ; to judge from the stray verses 
on the subject preserved by the commentaries on the 
Vtrasoliyam and the Dandiyalangdram, a good part 
of the results of these efforts has been lost irretrieva- 
bly. The survival of the Kalingattupparam in its 
entirety is perhaps due to its supreme merit ; for there 
are several instances in the history of Indian 
literatures of one good book killing many inferior ones. 
Jayangondar had many imitators but no rival among 
the poets of later times. 

Kuttan or Ottakkuttan came of the class of 

• * 

Sengundar who seem to have pursued 
Rattan. the occupations of fighting in the army 

as privates and captains, and of 
weaving 17 . Born in a poor family in Malari, an 
obscure village in the Cola country, 18 he sought service 
under Sankaran, the chieftain of Puduvai and father 
of Sadaiyan, the patron of the more celebrated 

1T The Divdlcaram has: §engundap-pa<}aiyar senait-talaivar tantuv&yar 
kftrugar kaikkdlar, though there seems to be no good Ms. authority 
for this. 

,s KQttan’s birth-place is given differently in different accounts. 
Mapaval takes the place of Malari in some, while others give to Shiyfijtl 
the honour of having been the place of Kdttan’s birth. But Malari is 
borne out epigraphically — 109 of 1928. 

K— 66 



522 ' THE cOfeAS 

Kamban. A certain Gangeyan soon discovered that 
Kuttan was destined for a higher purpose than house- 
hold service under Sankaran, and Kuttan expressed 
his gratitude by composing the N dldyirakkovai on his 
patron Gangeya. Another patron of Kuttan was a 
certain Soman of Puvanai, i.e. Tribhuvani near 
Pondicherry. When his fame rose, Kdttan was 
entertained in their court by three successive Cola 
monarchs beginning with Yikrama Cola; on each of 
them he composed an ula, besides a parani celebrating 
Yikrama Cola’s Kalinga war, and a pillaittamil on 
Kulottunga II. The last poem is easily the best among 
the known compositions of the poet on account of its 
copious diction, its melodious verse, and fine imagery. 
The stories of the circumstances leading to Kuttan ’s 

composition of the Itti-yelupadu, Eluppelupadu and 
the Tdkkaydgapparani belong more to anthropology 
than history. When the poet’s fame stood at its 
highest, the Sengundar wanted Kuttan to celebrate the 
glories of their community, and when the poet sought 
to excuse himself saying that he could not be expected 
to employ his talents in praising his own community, 
the irate sengundar made up their minds to do away 
with the man who was so utterly devoid of caste- 
consciousness. The poet escaped with his life by a 
trick played by his friends on the foolish Sengundar , 

but then he agreed to praise the Itti (spear), the chief 
weapon of the Sengwidar in war, if they would make 
an offering of 1008 heads severed from the shoulders 
of as many first-born Sengundar youths for the goddess 
to inspire Kdttan to his enterprise. After some 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


528 


argument this was agreed to, and Kuttan sang the 
Ittiyelupadu, seventy; verses in praise of the spear, and 
the Eluppelupadu, seventy verses calculated to bring 
back to life the 1008 youths whose lives had been 
sacrificed. Of the second poem only some fragments 
are left and these are by no means entitled to a high 
place as Tamil poetry. The ittiyelupadu, also poor 
poetry, contains a number of local allusions to 
apparently historical incidents in which sengundar 

soldiers and chieftains played a part; but there is no 
means yet of explaining these allusions and the 
annotators, unwilling to confess ignorance, fabricate 
stories of legendary origin. Kuttan is said to have 
become Ottakkuttan after he got the severed heads of 
the sengundar youths to attach themselves (otto) again 
to their respective bodies. A more plausible, if less 
romantic, story accounts for the name by saying that, 
at the request of the Cola king, the poet attached 
( otta ) a kanni of the uld to another verse composed 
by him on the spot. The Takkaydgapparani, obviously 
an imitation of the Kalingattupparani, in its 
metres and diction, handles a legendary theme 
with considerable force and power, and must 
rank high as literature, though well below its 
model. Other poems attributed to Kuttan are the 
Sarasvatiyandadi (said to be the very first of his 
compositions) in praise of Sarasvati, the goddess 
of learning, by whose grace he became a poet; 
and the Arumbait-tollayiram. The village of Kuttanur 
on the banks of the Arisil river in the Tanjore district 
keeps aliv e the memory of the poet and the patronage 



524 


THE CO^AS 


of his talents by the Cola rulers who gave him the 
village as a fief. A Sarasvati temple in it, and a 
pedestal inscribed in Tamil characters of the 12th 
century and recording that Kavipperumal alias 

Ovada-kuttar, the grandson of the Kaviccakravarti 
of Malari, set up an image of Sarasvati 18 , now lost, 
show that the stories which connect Kuttan with 
Sarasvati in a special manner are not altogether 
unfounded 20 . 

A greater poet than Ottakuttan was his junior 

contemporary Kamban, the celebrated 

Kamban. ___ . 

author of the Bamdyanam. This poem 
is the greatest epic in Tamil literature, and though the 
author states that he follows in the wake of Valnuki, 
still his work is no mere translation nor even an adap- 
tation of the Sanskrit original. In the treatment of 
the incidents in the story, and in the portrayal of the 
chief characters in it, Kamban makes many wide 
departures and handles the subject matter with a 
mastery and originality and a depth of poetic 
experience seldom equalled in Tamil literature. Like 
the other great poets who have enriched the literatures 
of the different languages of India and the East by 
their works on the Rama stoiy, Kamban imports into 
his narration the colour of his own time and place. 
Thus his description of Kosala is an idealised account 
of the features of the Cola country, and when he 

”109 of 1928. ARE. 1928, I 3; 1932 II, 47. 

“For notices of Kattan see: Pandit V. Sv&minatha Aiyar— 
introduction to Takkayagapparapi; E. Haghava Aiyangar— Sen Tamil 
lit, pp. 164 E.; and 6engundar Pirabcmdattiraftu by N&galinga Munirar 

.(1926)'. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


525 


wants to emphasise the glory of moonlight, he brings 
it home to his readers by saying that it spread every- 
where like the fame of his patron, Sadaiyan of 

Vennai 21 . Rama himself was as much master of the 
• • 

Tamil idiom as of the Sanskrit 22 . Sometimes Kamban 
is influenced by the somewhat rigid canons of Tamil 
poetics, as when he enters on an elaborate analysis of 
the emotions of Rama and Slta after a chance meeting 
which takes place immediately on Rama’s entry into 
Mithila. Elsewhere, as in the description of Sita’s 
behaviour when Hanuman handed over Rama’s ring to 
her, Kamban elaborates a brief hint of Sita’s emotions 
thrown out by Yalmiki who says that she rejoiced as if 
she had rejoined her husband. He compresses Valmlki ’s 
account at other points, as in Dasaratha’s asvamedha. 

From amidst a mass of legend centring round the 
name of the great poet, some facts seem to stand out 
prominently. His father was Aditya a resident of 
Muvalur (Tan j ore Dt. Mayavaram Tq.) in Tiruvalun- 
dur-nadu, and he seems to have been an uvaccan by 
caste 23 . Early in life, he attracted the attention of 
Sadaiyappavallal alias !§araraman, the Trigarta 
chieftain of Puduvai who is perhaps the same as 
the Trigarta mentioned in the Vikramasolan-ula i 24 
and in some undated inscriptions from Muvalur 
and Tirukkodikaval in which he is also described 
as Cediraya of the Ganga race 25 . He was patronised 

ai Mitiiaikkfitci v. 74. 

2 2 Nagarnlngu-pa(lalam v. 140. 

*»An arcaJca in the temples of K&)i and similar deities. 

**ante p. 70. 

« *29-34 of 1925; 57-58 of 1931. ARE. 1925 II 43. All alas are 
conventionally described as being of the Gangai-kula. 



526 


THE CC^AS 


by the contemporary Cola king and was granted 
by him a fief called Kambanadu and the title 
Kavic-cakravarti. He undertook the composition of 
the Ramayana, or rattier Rdmavatdra as he seems 
to have called it, out of an unbounded love for 
the theme, and he carried the story only up to the 
return of Rama to Ayodhya and his coronation as 
king, the uttara kdndam being the work either of 
Ottakkuttan or a lesser celebrity by name Yanidasan 
or Yaniyan Tadan. 

Perhaps less worthy of credence are some other 
details of a personal nature. He fell in love with a 

dancing girl Yalli whom he met in the Saiva matha 
presided over by Caturanana Pandita at Tiruvorri- 
vur, and verses are preserved in the Tamil-ndvalar- 
caritai which purport to record Kamban ’s great love 
and admiration of Yalli and his dissatisfaction with 
another claimant to his affections. The story goes 
that Kamban commanded the regard of all the ruling 
sovereigns of his time, including the Panclya and the 
Kakatiya Rudra, and that the Cola ruler, jealous of 
his fame and anxious to get rid of his over-mighty 
subject, plotted his murder and executed it in person; 
there is no means yet of deciding if this puerile account 
of the poet’s end has any foundation 26 . 

The date of Kamban has been much disputed, but 
t there seems to be now little room left 

His date. 

to doubt that he was a contemporary of 
Ottakkuttan and of Sekkilar. The palaeography of 

"R. Raghava Aiyangar has discussed the life and work of Kamban 
With remarkable ability in idea Tamil, Vol. 3. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE cOfeAS 


527 


the inscriptions of Sadaiyan mentioned above, and 
Kamban ’s description of the Cola country as belonging 
to Tyagama/vinodan, a title which recalls the surname 
of Vikrama Cola 27 , are fairly conclusive on the point. 
The distinct echoes of the iSwaka-Mndammi in 
Kamban ’s great work constitute, in the light of the date 
assigned to the former poem, another circumstance 
confirming the date thus suggested for Kamban. 

Besides the Ramaymam, Kamban is said to have 
been the author of the Erelupadu , and iSadagdpcvr- 
andadi, as also of a Mummanik-kovai (not now 
extant) which gave rise to an attack on Kamban’s 
verse by Vaniyan Tadan. The Erelupadu together 
with the Tirukkai valakkam is a eulogium on agri- 
culture and the cultivator class, the Vellalas. When the 
poem was being published in an assembly, Cedirayan, 
the son of Sadaiyan, was bitten by a poisonous snake 
and died ; he was restored to life by a couple of venbds 
composed by the poet for the purpose. The andddi 
had to be composed by Kamban to please the god of 
Srirangam before whom approval was sought by the 
poet for his Rdmdyana and who made it a condition 
that Kamban should praise his beloved devotee 

Sathakopa in a centum of verses. In view of the 

8 T Maruttumalaip-pa<Jalam, 58. There are two traditional verses on 

Kamban’s date, one apparently giving §. 807 and the other 5. 1100. 
The former seems to accord with a vague legend that the Rdmdya^am 
was published in the Srirangam temple under the presidency of 
N&thamuni, (&en Tamil xxv, pp. 308-9) . But this fact is not men- 
tioned in the DivyasHricarita or the Quruparampard. R. Raghava 
Aiyangar ingeniously suggests that the date usually taken as 807 is 
really 107 with an omitted thousand i.e., 1107 (8en Tamil ill, p. 179), 
and thus reconciles the two verses. 



528 


THE COJ.AS 


tendency, common in Indian literature, of fathering 
minor works of unknown origin upon celebrated 
authors, and in view of the mediocre and commonplace 
character of these two works, we have to receive with 
great suspicion the popular legends on their authorship 
and the occasions for their composition. 

Pugalendi is held by a persistent tradition to have 

been a contemporary of Ottakkuttan ; 

Pugajendi. native of Kalandai in the Tondai- 

• » « 

nad, he sought a career in the Pandyan court; later, 
he went over to the Cola court when the Col.a ruler 
espoused a Pandyan princess. There he roused the 
jealousy of Kuttan, and their intrigues against each 
other brought discord into the royal household. 
Finally, the differences between the poets were made 
up by the king’s intercession and they began to live in 
peace and friendship. This pretty story has no 
apparent claim to our credence. Again the Tondai- 
mandalarsatakam states that Pugalendi composed a 
Kalambakam, a eulogium in various metres, on 

Korrandai, the chief of Jinji ( Senjiyar lion ) ; if we 

accept the tradition that Ottakuttan and Pugalendi 

were contemporaries, this chief of Jinji may have been 

no other than the one mentioned in the Vikramasolan- 

•• 

ula 28 , but this is doubtful. Pugalendi is, however, best 

known by his Nalavenbd, a poem narrating the story 

of Nala in about four hundred stanzas in the venba, 

# # 

metre. The venba is to Tamil what the anusthup is to 
the Sanskrit language, a simple and flexible medium 
capable of producing great results in the hands of a 

'•ante p. 69. Sen Tamil li, 393 ff. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 529 

great poet. And Pugalendi’s venbas are indeed of 
high quality; and the popularity of the theme he 
handled gained great currency for them. Other works 
with little or no claim to literary merit have often been 
fathered on Pugalendi ; the tendency is partly 
explained by the easy style of the Nalavenba, which has 
made Pugalendi popular; but there is nothing in 
common between the fine poetry of the Nalavenba, and 
the miserable doggerels attributed to him by an 
ignorant popular tradition. The age of Pugalendi 
cannot be established by any tangible evidence, as his 
references to Candiran Suvarkki of Muranai-nagar in 
Malluvanadu cannot yet be related to the inscriptions; 
the echoes of the ideas and even phrases of Kamban in 
his poem are sufficiently striking to give plausibility to 
the view that Pugalendi could not have preceded that 
great poet. 

The Kulottungan-lxo vai and the Taujai-vanan- 

Icovai deserve to be mentioned as among 

Two Ic&VQtiSm u 

the best known works of secular 
literature belonging to the late Cola period. The 
first, as we have seen, is a Kavai on Kumara 
Kulottunga who may be tentatively identified with 
Kulottunga III. Little is known of the author, 
and the poem has no conspicuous merit except that it 
centres round a great Cola ruler and contains passing 
allusions to some of his achievements in war. The 
kovai, like the u Id, is a peace poem; it purports to 
deal with the stages in the development of love 
between a lover and his love from the moment they 
are thrown together by accident; in portraying eaeh 
situation, details relating to the birth and achievements 
K— 67 



530 


THE COjxAS 


of the hero are worked in by the poet. The Tanjai- 
vanan-kovai falls almost outside the period of Cola 
supremacy. After the TimJc-kovaiydr of Manikka- 
vasagar, this is the most popular among the poems of 
this type. The author, Poyya-moli Pulavar, may 
have been a native of Vanji, as the name Vanji- 
Poyyamoli indicates. He seems to have lived for 
some time in Tiruccengattangudi, Turaiyur and 
Madura; he is said to have finally betaken himself to 
Tondai-mandalam, but another tradition affirms that 
the poet burnt himself to death on the funeral pyre 
of his patron !§makkan of Araixur- 9 The Vanan of 

Tafijai, the hero of the Kovai, is reputed to have been 
the minister of the Pandya king and chieftain of 
Tanjakkur in Maranadu near Madura. He is des- 
cribed in the Kdvai 30 as ‘the eye of the Pandya who 
conquered the malai->ndda. > This must be a reference 
to Maravarman Kulasekhara I (1260-1308 A. D.). 
This inference gains strength from another fact. The 
Kdvai illustrates systematically the nil es of the 
Nambi-Ahapporul, which mentions Kulasekhai’a as 
the king in whose reign it was composed and 
published 31 . 

The Periya Puranam of fiekkilar and the 

Tiruvilaiyadal Puranam of Perum- 

Sekkil&r • u 

barrap-puliyur Nambi are two works 

**The story is told that the poet once fell asleep on the bed of his 
patron and that Slnakkan’s queen, not knowing this, also slept on the 
same bed for some time; when Slnakkan himself turned up and saw 
what had happened, the poet felt miserable though his patron did not 
mistake him in the least. 

••Verse 18. 

•*The commentary which gives this fact is coeval with its text 
and by the same author. Sen Tamil, v. p. 544. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE CO^AS 


631 


of high literary quality dealing with Saiva hagiology 
and legends, and these may be briefly considered 
before taking up the purely devotional literature of 
the age. Of the composition of the Tiruttondar 
Purdnam or the Periya Purdnam we have a graphic 
account by Umapati Sivacarya, c. A.D. 1313. In his 
Sekkildr Ndyandr Purdnam, this illustrious Saiva 
dcdrya narrates the life of Sekkilar, and this work in 
spite of its name, is unique for its historical and 
biographical interest. Umapati came in the main 
line of Saiva tradition and lived in an age when the 
memory of the great Cola rulers and their achievements 
was still fresh; he must have had access to much 
authentic information, and it is to his uncommon 
historical sense that we owe this life of Sekkilar: and 
another work of Umapati, which though necessarily 
less authentic in its details relating to a much earlier 
time, is the Tirumurai-kanda-purdnam, on the work 

of Nambi Andar Nambi, of which some account has 
already been given. 

Sekkilar was born at Kunrattur in Kunrai- 
•• •• •• 

valanadu, a subdivision of Puliyurk-kottam in 
Tondaimandalam. He is also called Sevai-kavalar 
and Gangai-kula-tilaka. He was a Vellala by caste; 
he sought an official career under the Cola 
government, rose to a high rank and earned the 
title U ttania-sdla-Pallavan. He was devoted to the 
deity of Tirunagesvaram and evinced his devotion 
by building in his native town of Kunrattur a Siva 
temple closely modelled on that of Tirunagesvaram , 



532 


THE CO^AS 


His deeply religious nature was roused to protest 

against the way in which the Slvakas indaman i, 

the impious work of a heretical Jaina, was being 

read, admired and enjoyed in the Court of the 

Cola monarch; he held that to spend time on such 

a book was to waste the opportunities of this 

life and to imperil the life hereafter, and exhorted 

the king to turn instead to the lives of the Saiva saints 

sketched by Sundaramurtti in his Tiruttondattoyai 

and elaborated by Nambi Andar Nambi. The king then 

commanded Sekkilar to expound the life-stories of the 

Saints, and being greatly attracted by the theme, he 

desired Sekkilar to write down the lives in extenso in 

a great poem, and gave him much wealth to enable 

him to undertake the task. Sekkilar then retired to 

Cidambaram, and with his mind filled with divine 

grace — there was a voice commanding him to begin the 

work with the words U lageldm , — he began to compose 

the Tiruttondar-Puranani in the beautiful 1000 

* • ■ 

pillared mapdapa within the precincts of the temple. 
Messengers went to the Cola monarch and reported 
the progress of the work from time to time until it 
reached completion with a total of 4253 stanzas. Then 
the king himself came to Cidambaram ; again a voice, 
accompanied by the tinklings of an anklet , commanded 
the king to listen with attention to the great work of 
Sekkilar, and there followed the formal publication 
of the work when Sekkilar expounded it from day to 
day for a whole year ; the work was universally hailed 
as a veritable fifth Veda in Tamil and immediately 
took its place as the twelfth book in the Saiva canon. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


533 


The author was honoured with the title Tondar-sir- 

• m 

paravuvdr, the singer of the glories of saints, adorned 
with the crown of knowledge ( ndnamudi ) and saluted 
by eveiyone present including the Cola monarch. 
Umapati’s poem must be read in the original for one 
to realise the gusto with which that author celebrates 
this epoch-making event in the history of South 
Indian Saivism. 

The Periya-Puranam has influenced the lives and 
thoughts of the Tamil Saiva population almost 
incessantly from the date of its composition. It has 
certainly thrown into the shade, at least in popular 
estimation, many another work of pure literature, not 
suffused with the didactic and religious purpose that 
pervades this Puranam. And to this day there are 
thousands of Tamils who accept the legends embalmed 
in Sekkilar’s melodious verse as literally and histori- 
cally true. To us the significance of this work lies in 
the rank it takes among the masterpieces of Tamil 
literature and in the picture it gives of the heroie age 
of Tamil Saivism as it was visualised by one of the 
most talented and deeply religious seers of the Tamil 
land. In every way, it is a composition that worthily 
commemorates the great age of the Imperial Colas and 
their sustained devotion to Saivism. 

Sekkilar himself tells us that his work was 
« • 

composed to please the sabhd of the Cola monarch 
Anapaya who covered the Perambalam with fine gold**, 

,7 Meya-vivvurai kon<Ju virumbumltfi* 
jeyavanfirup-p^rambalafi-jeyya 
ttiya ponnapi £6j[AJnf<JtUip&- 
rftya filr-anapftyaaarafeval— Pdt/iram, 8 . 



534 


THE CO^jAS 


and we know that this description fits only Kul6- 
ttunga II. It may be noted, however, that the name 
Sekkilar occurs as that of an official of the revenue 
department as early as A.D. 1093 in the reign of 
Kulottunga I 33 . If this official was of the same family 
as the great poet, the latter must be taken to have 
come of a family which had distinguished itself for 
some generations in the service of the state. Umapati 
Sivacarya states that fSekkilar had a younger brother 
Palaravayar, and it seems most probable that it is he 
that is mentioned in an early inscription of the reign 

of Kulottunga II 34 under the name Sekkilar 
Palaravayar Kalappalarayan of Kunrattur. It may 
be noted in passing that Sekkilar was a family name, 
a fact which strengthens the identifications proposed 
here: Kanratturir-C e/ckildr tiru-marapu sirandadatire 

(Umapati). Another member of the family, Sekkilan 


Ammaiyappan Parantakadevan alias Karikalasola 
Pallavarayan, made a gift at Tirukkadaiyur in the 
Tanjore district in 1182' 5 . 

The Tiruviluiyddal Purdnam of Perumbaryap- 

puliyur-nambi is the earliest Tamil 

TirZwvwai. version we possess of the legends 

centring round Madura and describing 

the sixty-four miraculous sports of Siva. The author 
was a Brahmin bom at Selli-nagar, now Pamnyur, 
near Kari-valamvanda-nallur in the Tinnevelly 
district. He composed his work at the request of the 


••180 of 1894. 
•*445 of 1912. 
••39 of 1906. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE CtyjAS 


585 


contemporary Pandya king and was richly rewarded 

by him for his effort, "i His spiritual guru was a 

* 

certain Vinayaka who belonged to Maligaimadam in 

Cidambaram, and the name of Cidambaram seems to 

be prefixed to his own name either to indicate the fact 

that he had his initiation there or more generally to 

mark his devotion to Nataraja, the presiding deity of 

the place. It has been pointed out that in A.D. 1227 

a member of our author’s family, Anandatandava- 

nambi or his wife, erected a gopura in Madura. This 

may be taken to furnish a rough indication of the age 

of our author also ; but the exact chronological relation 

between our author and Anandatiindavanambi cannot 

• • 

vet be settled 36 . 

* 

A much later version of the ‘sacred sports’ by 
Paranjoti held the field, and the earlier work of 
Nambi had almost been lost sight of till it was 
recovered, like many another classic, by that prince 
of modem Tamil scholars, Rvaminatha Aiyar. 
Nambi ’s work differs in many important respects from 
Paranjoti ’s, particularly in the names of the Pandyan 
kings in whose time particular miracles are believed 
to have occurred . The fictitious list of successive 
rulers inheriting the throne for sixty-four •genera- 
tions from father to son, found in the Hdldsya- 
maMtmya and in Paranjoti, is unknown to Nambi, 
who names in all only less than ten kings. The order 
in which the sports are narrated also differs ; there are 
besides many other minor differences all of which have 

‘•For more details see introduction to V. Svaminatha Aiyar's 
edition of the work. Note, however, that 133 of 1908, (A.D. 1304), 

mentions either our author or a namesake of his. 



686 


THE C6VAS 


been carefully noted by the learned editor of Nambi *s 
Puranam. Authors who rush to deduce history from 
legend will do well to note the warning furnished by a 
study of these two versions. 


To turn now to the purely religious literature of 

the age. The Tamil Saiva canon owes 
Literature. its present arrangement to Nambi 

Andar Nambi who mav certainly be 
assigned to the early eleventh century, if not to the 
close of the tenth. As has been stated al read}', 
Umapati Sivacarya describes in a short work, Tim- 
mumi-kanda-puranam, the redaction of the Saiva 
canon by Nambi Andar Nambi. He states that Nambi, 
in the first instance arranged the canon in the form of 
ten books: the first three comprising 384 padigams of 

Tiru-Nana-Sambandar, books four to 

fTIrumufai. 

six made up of 307 padigams of 
Tirunavukkarasu, 100 padigams of Sundara forming 
the seventh book, the Tiruvasagam of Manikkavasagar 


being the eighth, and a number of tiruvisaippds 37 by 
nine different authors and the Tirumandiram of 
Tirumular forming the last two books. We learn 
that subsequently the king requested Nambi to 
put together one more book from the padigams left 
over, including the pdsuram uttered by &iva himself 
and calculated to procure siddhi; Nambi accordingly 
arranged the eleventh book of the Canon . This 


•’These contain hymns on the Tanjore temple and on its copy, the 
temple of Gangai'-kopda-Cdlapuram ; this may be taken to give an indi- 
cation of the date of Nambi Apd&r Nambi, if we may be certain that 
we have this ninth book as Nambi left It. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE CO^AS 


587 


section, including the compositions of Nambi himself, 
comprises the works of twelve different authors, two 
of whom are among the sixty-three saints of Saivism. 
The Peri/yapurdnam counts as the twelfth book. 
Clearly the arrangement of the books is not chrono- 
logical; for to give the most striking instance, Tiru- 
mular was earlier than Sundaramurtti and is 
mentioned in the Tiruttondattogai ; but the Tin i- 
m an dir am is only the tenth book, whereas Sundara- 
murtti ’s hymns form the seventh. 

Among the authors of the ninth Book of the 
Canon, Gandaraditya may be definitely identified 
with the son of Parantaka 1 . 38 The attempt to 
identify Sendanar with Tirumahgaittevar on the 
strength of an inscription of the reign of Rajaraja I 
from Tiruvllimilalai 39 can hardly be considered 
satisfactory; the inscription cited does not seem to 
furnish conclusive proof of the identity, and it seems 
unlikely that tradition could in this instance have erred 
so far as to make two authors out of one ; for we should 
not forget that the arrangement of the Canon seems 
to have reached its present form befoi’e the age of 
Umapati. Karuvur-devar who has hymns on three 
Coja temples, the Adityesvara at Kalandai, the 
Raj arajes vara at Tanjore, and the Gangaikondacoles- 
vara at Gangaikonda-colapuram, was as his name 
indicates a native of Karuvur, and the legends centring 
round his name have found a place in the Karuvur 
Puranam 40 . He may be assigned to the first half of 

'* ante i, p. 182. 

”449 of 1908, Sen Tamil, Hi. PP- 358-62. 

”Ch. 39 vv. 62-80. Sen Tamil, lv, pp. 141-145. 

K— 68 



538 


THE COjuAS 


the eleventh century A.D. It is possible that Nambi 
Kada Nambi who has sung two hymns, one each on 
Tiruvartir and Koyil (Cidambaram) was identical 
with the Atreya Nambi Kada Nambi, an arcaka 
mentioned in an inscription dated A.D. 1050 from 
Tiruvaiyaru 41 . 

Among doctrinal works, the Siva-N ana-bodam of 

Meykandar, written in the first half of 

Theology. 

the thirteenth century A.D. 42 , is the first 
attempt at a systematic statement of the tenets of 
Tamil Saivism. This is a short treatise of a dozen 
aphorisms (siitras) which seem to have been trans- 
lated from a Sanskrit original 48 ; the author has added 
varttikas of his own which explain and illustrate the 
argument of each of the sutras and fix their meanings. 
The name & i va-nuna-bddain is explained thus. ‘ ‘ Sivam 
is one; nanam is the knowledge of its true nature; 
bodam is the realisation of such knowledge 44 ’ ’ ' • 

“221 of 1894. 

**&en Tamil » iii» PP. 189*90. 

_ 4, Rflina.98« hUstri says that tho original forms part of th© Haurava 
Agama ( Tirumandiram Intr. p. 7). Th© view has often been expressed 
that th© Tamil work is the original and the Sanskrit is th© translation. 
See T, I. Tambyah: Psalms of a &aiva Saint, p, xix. Th© arguments 
adduced in support of this position are inconclusive. The Sanskrit work 
is in a nvtfhup verse like all doamas, corresponds to the Tamil stitras 
and does not Contain anything corresponding to th© Tamil varttikas. Both 

Ura&pat&iva, author of the Pau$karabh&$ya and Si vfi.gr ayCgi held the 
view that th© Sanskrit work is th© original, cf. V. P. Kftntimatl- 
n&tha Pillai, Tamipciva-fidnarbo&ac-citappu (1926) pp. 54, 69. VidySrapya 
is said to have written a monistic exposition of the Sanskrit work, 

ibid >, PP. 80, 47. Siva as guru told Mftplkkavfiiagar that he held the 
Siva-Myia-bOdam in his hand; this may be not so much a daring 
anachronism antedating the work of Meykapgfir as Pope thought 
(Tiruvdfogam, xxii), as the expression of a belief in the antiquity of 
the Sanskrit work of that name. 

**“Sivam onjru; adanait-tdtudal Hdnam; tOrndadanait-ttfidal btidam”. 
Ka<Javu|«m&*munivar, v. 36 Tirupperunduyaic-carukkam, Tiruv&davflr* 
agiga) Purfipam. 



literature: under the colas 


539 


The scheme of the twelve sutras is simple. The first 
three sutras assert the existence of the three entities 
God ( pati ), bondage ( pasa ) and soul (pasu) ; the 
three next define and explain their nature and 
interrelation; the next triad deals with the means 
( sddhana ) of release, and the last part is devoted to the 
nature of release. The key position held by the work 
of Meykapdar in the literature of Tamil Saivisra is 
brought out by a verse which says : ‘ The V eda is the 
cow; its milk is the true Agama; the Tamil sung by 
the Four is the ghee extracted from it; and the virtue 
of the Tamil work of Meykandan of the celebrated 
(city of) V eniiai is the fine taste of the ghee ’ 45 . 

The Bodam was preceded by two short works 
which may be said to stand almost in the relation of 
text and commentary. 46 These are the Tiruvundiydr 
and Tirukkalirruppadiydr by two authors, teacher and 
disciple according to tradition, and both known by 
the name or rather title Uyya-vanda-devar. They are 
both works meant to present in an easy style the main 
aspects of Saiva doctrine and practice. 

J 

work of 
ittiydr of 

Arunandi, reputed in tradition to have been first the 

“Vedam pasu, adan pal mey agamam n&lv&r 
Odum Tamil adanin uJJQrum ney-poda migu 
Neyyin uruduvaly&m nl) Veppai Meykapdan. 

Seyda Tamil nUlin tiyam. 

♦•The Saiva-Sittdnta Varal&tu by Anavaratavinayakam Piflai 
(Madras, 1908). 


After the 3iva-hdna-bddam, the next 
importance on doctrine is the 3 ivarhana-S 



540 


THE CO^AS 


guru of Meykandar ’s father and then the disciple of 
Meykandar himself.) Though written in verse, it 
is a comprehensive statement of the true doctrine 
,( Supakkam , Svapaksa) introduced by a critical discus- 
sion of rival systems (para-pakkani) of which no fewer 
than fourteen, including four schools of Buddhism and 
two of Jainism, are passed under review. This great 
work, which is, in fact, the classic treatise on Tamil 
Saivism, for the work of Meykandar is too cryptic and 
fails to explain the position of Saivism vis-a-vis other 
systems, has been the subject of many commentaries 
and is to this day the most widely read manual of 
Saivism among the Tamils. The Irupa-virupadhu by 
the same writer owes its name to the alternate use of 
two metres in its twenty verses which expound the 
doctrine in the form of a dialogue between teacher 
and pupil. This work is said to have been composed 
by Arunandi to enshrine the memory of his beloved 
teacher in each of its verses; and so it does. 

Another catechism, much the simplest of all 
manuals on Saivism, is the Unmai-vilakkam by 
Manavasagan-gadandar of Tiruvadi (South Arcot) 
who claims that his work makes not the slightest 
departure from the essence of the Agamas. Umapati 
Sivacarya, who lived at the close of the thirteenth and 
the early years of the fourteenth century 47 , was the 
author of eight works on the doctrine which complete 
the tale of the Saiva Siddhanta Sastras in Tamil. 

4 7 We have the £aka data 1235 in his Bankarpanir&karawm, 
payiram, 26 « 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


541 


They are the following: 

1. Sivappirak as* am, an ambitious treatise, only 

less important than the &iva-nana~sitli- 
ydr. One hundred verses. 

2. Tiru-varut-payan composed on the model of 

the celebrated Tirukkural and comprising 
ten division of ten kurals each. 

3. Vina-venba, a short catechism of thirteen 

Venbas. 

m 

4. Porrippahrodai, a short work of 100 lines. 

5. Kodikkavi, a very short exposition in four 

verses. 

6. Nenjuvidu-tfitu adopting the sandesa form 

which had already found imitators in 
Tamil. 

7. Unmai-)ieri-vilakkam devoted to the path 

of realisation and dealing with ‘the ten 
karyas.’ iS 

8. S auk arpa-n i ra k a ran am devoted, like the 

‘ parapaksa’ of the Sittiyar, to a critique of 
other creeds. Unlike the earlier work, this 
is much exercised with the minute differ- 
ences within the very fold of Saivism. 


4 8 These are : tattva rupam, tattva darSanam and tattva Suddhi, 
fttma rupam, atma darganam and atma duddhi, Siva rupam, Siva 
darSanam, Siva-ydgam and Siva*bh5gam. The authorship of this work 
has been recently ascribed to Tattuvan&thar of Shiy&ii, and the 

Tvgajarubddam of §ifxambala»n&<Jigal included among the fourteen 
5&stras on the strength of a fresh study of the mss. of the work. 

£aiva$iddh&nta Sdttiram (1934), pp. 980*2. and 1124. 



542 


THE COliAS 


It is curious that few works of religious 

literature seem to have been composed 
^ UC works f ot 111111 ^ the Vaisnavas of the Tamil country 
vaiwavtsm. in this period. It has been pointed out 

already that the arrangement of the 
Vaisnava canon proceeded side by side with that of 
the Saiva canon in the tenth and early eleventh 
centuries. There is also ample evidence to show that 

a succession of great Vaisnava deary as composed 
numerous devotional poems and philosophical works 
in the Sanskrit language in this period; Yamunacarya, 
Yadavaprakasa and Ramanuja himself are only the 
leading examples of a large group of authors justly 
celebrated for their learning and devotion and for 
their literary achievements. Strangely enough, how- 
ever, Vaisnavism which started as a popular movement 
of religious reform and revival, appears to have 
developed in the Cola period a sort of a high-brow 
attitude and scorned the use of the popular idiom; 
in fact, the writers of this school developed in course 
of time a quaint style more Sanskritic than Tamil 
in its make-up which is seen at its best in the great 
commentaries of Periya-vaccan Pillai and N ambillai. 
Among the works composed in this style of writing, 
one of the earliest is the short commentary, the 
Ardyirappadi, on Nammalvar’s Tiruvdymoli, by 
Kurugaippiran Pillan, a relative and disciple of 
Ramanuja. 


There is, 

R&m&nuja- 

n&rrand&di. 


however, one poem which deserves 
mention if only because it is one of the 
few exceptions to the general role 
followed by the V aiijpava authors of 



LITERATURE UNDER THE CO^AS 


643 


the age. It is the Reiman iija-nurrandddi, a century 
of verses in the Kalitturai metre in praise of 

i 

Ramanuja by his disciple Tiruvarangattu Amu- 
danar. This poem in a simple devotional style is 
held in great esteem and is even called prapanna- 
gdyatn as it is often repeated as a daily prayer. The 
central idea of the poem is that without the grace of 
the guru there is no way to salvation. The author 
avows that he has no faith in tapas 49 , and pronounces 
a sweeping condemnation on every creed other than 
Ramanuja’s 50 . Ramanuja’s great and abiding bhakti, 
sordda Jcddal perunjuli 51 , and his profound attach- 
ment to the Rdmagana ? 2 are specially stressed in the 
poem . It is not improbable that our author is 
identical with the Tiruvarangattamudanar of 
Mungirkudi mentioned in an inscription from 
Tirukkoyilur of the third year of Khlottunga II 58 . 

Grammar, rhetoric and lexicography have always 

claimed the attention of authors since 

Grammar, etc. , , . „ ... ... , 

the beginning of written literature, 
and striking contributions were made in these depart- 
ments in the Cola period. The Ydpparungalam and 
Y dpparn nga lak kdrigai of Amitasagara, a Jaina 
ascetic, were composed sometime towards thp close of 

the tenth century. The correct form 
Amita-sagara. of the author’s name is Amita-sagara 

(the boundless ocean — alapparungadal) 

*»v. 14. 

"v. 99. 

•>v. 15. 

•*v. 37. 

**315 of 1921. Contra ARE. 1922, II, 23, where the inscription Is 
assigned to Kulottunga III. 



544 


THE CO^AS 


and not Amrta-sagara as it is sometimes written by 

mistake. The author calls himself a disciple of 

Gunasagara, quotes the Suldmani and is quoted 

by Buddhamitra, the annotator of the Virasoliymn. 

The text and commentary of the Viva soli yam both 

date from the reign of Virarajendra. The age 

of the Sulamani is not beyond dispute; it has 

been ascribed to the latter half of the nintli 

century 54 , but it might well have been some 

centuries earlier. The Kdrigai of Amitasagara soon 

attained great celebrity and the place where the work 

was composed came to be known as Karigai-Kulattur, 

as may be seen from two inscriptions of the reign of 

Kulottunga I, from Nklur 55 . Those inscriptions state 

that an ancestor of Kandan Madliavan of Kulattur 

• • • 

induced Amitasagara to come and live in the fiiru- 
Kunranadu of the Javangondasbla-mandalam; if this 
name was current in Amitasagara ’s time, the composi- 
tion of these two works on Ydppu must have been later 
than the last years of Rajaraja I who assumed the title 
Jayangonda-sola towards the close of his reign. 

The Ydpparungalam is a treatise on prosody of 
which the Kdrigai is an abridgement. It is unique 
in its range and it offers an exhaustive treatment 
of the variety of metres in Tamil ; it is even more 
valuable for the fine commentary to which it has 

**&en Tamil, v. pp. 99-102. 

••534 and 535 of 1921; K. V. S. Aiyar who edits these inscriptions, 
El. xviii No. 8, falls into a number of errors which have been. Corrected 
by M. Kaghava Alyangar in JIB. I may add that I am unable to accept 
the identity of Gupas&gara, the guru of Amita S&gara, with the 
Gupas&gara of the KaJlugumalai inscriptions with no more evidence than 
the identity of a name so common among Jain ascetics. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


545 


given rise. A large number of literary specimens 
.otherwise unknown have been preserved in this 
commentary. The same observation holds good of the 
commentary on the Kdrigai by Gunasagara, who is 
believed to have been a disciple of Amitasagara the 
pupil taking the name of his guru’s guru. 

The Virasoliyam of Buddhamitra, and its 

commentarv by Perundevanar, a 

Buddhamitra. .. 0 A , . , . 

pupil of the author, next claim our 
attention. The Cola monarch Virarajendra is men- 
tioned by name as a great Tamil scholar 50 ; this fact 
and the name of the work leave no doubt that it was 
composed in Virarajendra ’s reign. The commentary 
cites the tint manni valara introduction of Rajen- 
dra I 57 and mentions the battles of Koppam 58 and 
Kudal-sangamam 59 . Buddhamitra is called ‘the ruler 
of Ponparri’, in the pay i ram or preface to his 
work; Ponparri may be the same as Ponpetti in the 
Tanjore district 60 , and the title of Buddhamitra may 
imply that he got an assignment on the revenues of 
the place from the Cola ruler. The Virasoliyam is 
written in Kalitturai metre and planned on the basis 
of a synthesis between the Tamil and Sanskrit 
systems of grammar and rhetoric and comprises 
the usual five sections : Sandhi ( eluttu ), Sol, 
Porul, YSppu and Alankara (mi). The author’s 

••meviya vepkuflaic-cembiyan VIrar&j§ndiran-j;an 

n&viyal Sendamit-collin moll” &andi vers© 7. 

"Yftppu 19. 

••Y&PPU 84. 

••AlaAgfiram 89. 

**ARB. 1899, paragraph 60. 

K— 69 



546 


THE COJAS 


preference for Sanskrit titles is seen in the names of 
the first and last sections, while the names and order of 
the sections show even more clearly his partiality for 
the Sanskrit system. The work is full of interest for 
a student of the history of grammatical theory in 
Tamil. 

The Dandiyalangaram is the only work devoted 

DajMtfyaian- entirely to a discussion of ala/hkdra, 

garam. or am - as ft j s called in Tamil. The 

name of the work is justified by its closely following 
the model of Dandi’s Kdvyadarsa, being in fact 
a more or less close rendering of it in Tamil. The 
name of the author and the details of his life and age 
have disappeared altogether. There is a verse of un- 
known age which states that the author was the son of 
Ambikapati, and was himself called Dandi, that he 
attained eminence in Sanskrit and Tamil learning, 
expounding almikara on the lines laid down by 
Sanskrit rhetoricians. The great poet Kamban is 
reputed to have had a son Ambikapati by name, and it 
is sometimes held that our author was the grandson 
of Kamban. One of the earliest references to the 
Dandiyalangaram is that by Adiyarkkunallar, in his 
celebrated commentary on the Silappadikdram. The 
work was also apparently called Aniyiyal , 61 Aniyilak- 
kanam and Aniyadigaram. It is composed in sutra 
style and, like the Kdvyadarsa, it treats of the nature 
of poetry and kavya, and of figures of speech under 
two generic heads — arthalankara ( Porulani ) and 

«»Not all the citations of Afliy&rkkunaH&r from this work could 
be traced in the current editions of the Dayfayalangdram. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE CO^AS 547 

sabdalankara ( sollani ). The author of the Prayoga- 
vivekam, writing sometime in the eighteenth century, 
says that the author of the Dandiyalangaram 
annotated the sutras and illustrated them himself. 
This seems probable, and it is interesting to note 
that some of the illustrative stanzas are in praise of 
Anapaya Cola. 62 

The Neminddam of Gunavir ap andita is a short 
Neminadam. treatise comprising less than 100 

verses in the Venbd metre and treating of the ortho- 
graphs and parts of speech ( eluttu and sol) of the 
Tamil language. The work takes its name from the 
tlrthcmkara Neminatha of South Mylapore, Ten- 
mayilapuri 63 . The author was a Jain, and pupil of 
Vaceanandi (Vajranandi) of Kalandai, possibly the 
the same place as that of Pugalendi. Another work 
of Gunavlra on prosody is called Venbappdttiyal, also 
Vaccanandi-malai, the garland of Vaceanandi, after 
the author’s guru. From the preface to the Vaccanan- 
di-malai we learn that the author’s literary activity 
fell in the reign of Tribhuvana-deva, no doubt iden- 
tical with Tribhuvana-vlradeva of the inscriptions, i.e. 
Kulottunga III. If this view is correct, Neminathar, 
who according to tradition recorded in a recent 
compilation, the Tamil- nd valar-ca ri tai, was a contem- 
porary of Ottakkuttan, might not be identical with 
our author. 


8 2 See Preface to Dn^iyalangdrcmv ed. Arumugam Serval (1920), 
8 'Nannul-Maylainddarurai, p. xvli. 



548 


THE CO^AS 


The N annul (Good Book) by Pavanandi, again a 

Jain author, is another work composed 
in the reign of Kulottunga III. By its 
simplicity and terseness, the book has practically dis- 
placed all other works as the beginner’s handbook of 
Tamil grammar. The author was patronised by 
Amarabharanan Slyagangan, a feudatory of Kulot- 
tunga III. The N annul treats only of eluttu and sol, 
and it is not clear if the author stopped there, or if the 

rest of his work has been lost. The 
^nS! 0t Nambiyahapporul of Narkaviraja- 

nambi is the last work that falls to be 


noticed here. Tamil literature divides its subject 
matter into two great divisions Puram and Aham, 
literally ‘external’ and ‘internal’, almost corresponding 
to the philosophical distinction between ‘objective’ and 
‘subjective.’ The ahapporul generally resolves itself 
into a minute analysis of subjective reactions to erotic 
situations, though this by no means exhausts the 
content of this division. It has been pointed out 
already that this work was composed in the reign of 
Maravarman Kulasekhara I and that it has been 
systematically illustrated in the Tanjai-Vdnait-Kovai. 


The Pingalandai and the Cuddniani are two 

lexicons that may be assigned to 
Lexicography. Cola period with great probability. 

The CuQama/ni or the Nigantu-Cuddmani as the 
author, Manclala-Purusa, seems to have designated his 
work, distinctly mentions the Kdrigai of Amitasagara 
m giving the different senses in which that word is 
applied; the Cuddmani must therefore have been 



LITERATURE UNDER THE COLAS 


549 


composed after the Yapparungalakkarigai; how long 
after it is not easy to decide. 64 The two lexicons mark 
'progressive stages in the advancement of lexicography 
in Tamil. It should be noted that if the Pingalandai 
was, as its pdyiram states, composed by the son of the 
author of the earliest Tamil nigandu known, the 

3 endan-Divdkaram, and if those are right that assign 
a very high antiquity to the Divdkaram , the 
Pingalandai must be taken also to belong to the age 
anterior to the rise of the Yijayalaya line of kings 65 . 

Some of the great commentators must have no 

doubt flourished in the centuries of 

Commentaiies. £jgj a difficult to point to 

definite data bearing on the age of these writers. On 
the other hand no systematic effort has yet been made 
to settle the chronological relations among these 
authors. Ilampuranar, often mentioned as adigal 
because he was an ascetic, was no doubt among the 
earliest of them; he cites the Divdkaram, and his 
eorpmentary on the Tolkdppiyam is a model of terse 
and critical elucidation of a difficult text. Senavarai- 
yar, Perasiriyar and Naccinarkkiniyar followed him, 
and they often cite his views if not always by his name. 
Except his name and the fact that he composed a 
commentary on the Solladigaram of Tolkappiyam, we 
know nothing of Senavaraiyar at present; even the 
name is doubtful, for Senavaraiyar is said to have 

®Uf Kr§paR&ya mentioned in St. 10 of the ninth section refers to the 
Vijayanagar ruler, the work must be taken to fall outside the period 
covered in this chapter. 

•“For further details see S. Vaiyapurl Pillai, Introd. to Tamil 
lexicon, p. xxvi. 



550 


THE C6^AS 


been the name of a caste, by Mayilai-nathar, 
in his commentary on the Nawnul. The co mmen tary 
of Perasiriyar is again accessible only for parts of 
the Poruladigaram, the work once believed to be 
his having turned out to be by another hand, 
Deyvaccilaiyar. Perasiriyar also wrote a gloss on the 
Tiruccirrambalakkovaiydr G5 \ He is referred to in 
terms of very high regard by the commentator of the 
Ydpparungalam ; the attempt 06 to identify him, on 
that accomit, with Iraiyandr, the mysterious author of 
the Kalaviyal, is rather misplaced. Adiyarkkunallar 
who cites the poets of this period, like Jayangondar 
and Kuttan, rather freely in his commentary on the 
£ flap padikdram, and Parimelalagar who is criticised 
by Naccinarkkiniyar 67 may also have belonged to our 
period. Parimelalagar wrote excellent commentaries 
on the Tirukkural and Paripddal. 

If the literary chronology of Tamil is replete 

Sanskrit with many unsolved problems, the 
Literature. situation is even worse with regard to 

Sanskrit literature. We have ample evidence from 
all sides that Sanskrit learning and literary activity 
in its various branches found steady encouragement 
and flourished at a high level throughout the period 
of our study; attention has been drawn elsewhere to 
the endowments for colleges where different branches 
of Vedic and philosophic study were pursued, and 
to the popularity of t'he Prabhakara-mimamsa 

•••Some hold that there were two authors of the same name, 
“Y&pparmgaUm, ed. Bhavanandamf PUlai, pp. tv-v. 

ParipdQal Introdn. p. xxi. 



LITERATURE UNDER THE CO^AS 


551 


and of the Rupavatara attested by the inscriptions. 

> A detailed account of Sanskrit literature in this 
period cannot yet be undertaken, for those preliminary 
researches are yet to be made without which a 
general survey of literary activity over two 
or three centuries can hardly be attempted. But 
attention may be drawn here to one or two significant 
facts. First, we have some evidence to show that 
the Co]a monarchs took a personal interest in the 
growih and spread of Sanskrit studies ; from 
the introductory verses in the Sanskrit lexicon 
NdnartMmava-samksepa, we learn that a village of 

Saiva Brahmins learned in Sanskrit lore was 


established in the Cola country by Kulottunga I, that 
from that village a certain Kesavasvamin of the Yatsa 
gotra, a member of a family of hereditary gramma- 
rians, was in the service of Rajaraja II, and that he 
was commissioned by the king to prepare, for the use 
of young scholars, this Sanskrit lexicon in which the 
words are arranged in alphabetical order and their 
various meanings set forth, as directed by the king 
himself. 67 * A more important instance of royal 


patronage of Sanskrit learning belongs to a much 
earlier period. It is this. Madhava, the son of 

Venkatarya and Sundari, lived in a 


Rg-VSda 
Bh&?ya of 


village on the south bank of the 


Venkata 

Mftdbava. 


Kaveri, and composed an extensive 


bhdsya on the Rg-veda. He says that 


while writing his great work, he lived in comfort in 


* ’ 'Nandrth(lrnaix>samk$epa t Triv. Sans. Series No. 23, 23 and 31— 
vv. 1-20 at the beginning. 



653 


THE Cd{<AS 


the country of the most renowned warrior of the 
world: Jag at am, ekavirasya visage nivasan sukham™. 
This Statement implies that he flourished Under royal 
patronage ; and though he does not mention the name 
of his patron monarch, we may surmise that the 
reference is to Parantaka I who is said in the 
KanyakurnSri inscription of Yirarajendra to have 
earned for himself the name Yira-Coda by conquering 
the invincible KrsnarSja 69 . The great Vedabhasyas 
of a later age composed under the patronage of the 
early Yijayanagar rulers would thus seem to have 
followed the model set by the first great ruler among 
the Imperial Colas of the Yijavalaya line. 


*• Proceedings of the Fifth (Alt India ) Oriental Conference, 

pp. 288 ff. 

••Ante t, p. 157. 


f 



CORRIGENDA. 


Page. 

Line. 

For 

85 

24 , 

SipnJaiySJ 

275 

15 

•najraiyiir 

290 

1 

thirteenth 

313 

16 

oppresive 

364 

22 

fisherman 

365 

6 

descendants 

476 

10 

Attfir 

505 

4 

delete ‘the* 

509 

1 

my 

53S n. 43. 

8 

PauskarabhS^ya 

541 

i 

division 

544 

4 

Buddhamitra 


Read. 

SdjrmJaiyaJ 

-naraiyfir 

thirtieth 

oppressive 

fishermen 

descendants 

Allttr 

may 

Pau$karabh&9ya, 

divisions 

Perundevan&r 



