A History of 
SOUTH INDIA 


from Prehistoric Times 
to the Fall of Vijayanagar 


K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI, m.a. 

Professor of Indology, University of Mysore 



Geoffrey Cumberlege 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 






First Published 1955 

esr-4 

S u 

\6 6Sg, 




DEDICATED 

BY HIS GRACIOUS PERMISSION 
TO 

HIS HIGHNESS 

SRI JAYACHAMARAJA WADIYAR BAHADUR 


MAHARAJA OF MYSORE 


PATRON 








CONTENTS 

I. Survey of the Sources . . .1 

II. The Land in Relation to History . . 34 

III. The Earliest Peoplfs and Cultures . 49 

IV. The Dawn of History: Aryanization 64 

V. The Age of the Mauryan Empire . . "9 

VI. The SatavAhanas and their Successors . 88 

VII. The Age of the Sangam and after .110 

VIII. Conflict of Three Empires . • 141 

IX. The Balance of Two Empires . .165 

X. The Age of the Four Kingdoms . . 202 

XI. The BahmanIs and the Rise of Vijayanagar . 217 

XII. The Empire of Vijayanagar . 253 

XIII. Social and Economic Conditions . . 301 

XIV. Literature . . . .327 

XV. Religion and Philosophy . • 404 

XVI. Art and Architecture . . 423 

Appendix ..... 475 

Errata . 477 

Index ..... 479 




ILLUSTRATIONS 


Frescoes from Tanjore Frontispiece 

Plates I— XXVIII between pages 432-3 

I. Karle: Chaitya main hall 

II. Amaravatl: The Miracle of the Infuriated 

Elephant 

III. Ajanta: Cave 19 

IV. Aihole: Durga temple from the SW. 

V. Pattadakal: Papanatha temple 

Virupaksha temple 

VI. Elephanta: Trimurti 

VII. Ellora: Dumarlena 

VIII. Ellora : Kailasa temple 

IX. Mamallapuram: The Descent of the Ganges 

X. Mamallapuram : General view of the Rathas 
Shore temple 

XI. Kanchipuram: Kailasanatha temple 

Vaikunthaperumal temple 

XII. Narttamalai: Vijayalaya temple 

XIII. Kodumbajur: Muvarkoil 

XIV. Tanjore: Great temple (general view) 

XV. Dancing Siva (X Century) 

XVI. Sambandhamurti 

Sundaramurti from Tirunamanallur 
Sundaramurti from Polonnaruva 

XVII. Vishnu 
XVIII. Lakshml 

XIX. Somanathapur: KeSava temple 
XX. Belur: Chennakesava temple (eastern doorway) 



„ii A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

XXI. BhuvaneSvar: Lingaraja temple 
XXII. Vijayanagar: Vitthala temple (interior) 
XXIII. Srirangam (XVII Century): Mantapam 

XXIV. Krishnadeva Raya and Queens 

XXV. Daulatabad fort 

Bijapur: Ibrahim Rauza 

XXVI. Bijapur: Mihtar Mahal 
XXVII. Gulbarga : Jami Masjid 
XXVIII. BicLr: Madrasa of Mahmud Gawan 


MAPS 

South India (Physical) 

South India: 300 B.c. — a.d. 500 
South India: a.d. 500—850 
South India: a.d. 850 — 1200 
Greater India 

South India: a.d. 1200—1325 
South India in Vijayanagar times 


facing page 34 
83 

. 142 

. 193 

. 194 

. 203 

. 254 



SURVEY OF THE SOURCES 


trend s-To th^i s' to'mtL fain 'or lessons to draw— main approach sti/neces- 
sariiy from the North— political and cultural history: their relation. 

Our aim in this book is to present a brief general survey of the 
ancient history of South India to the middle of the seventeenth 
century a.d. Then began a new epoch with the downfall of the 
empire of Vijayanagar, its partition between the sultanates of 
Bijapur and Golconda, and the establishment of the English 
East India Company at several points on the coast of peninsular 
India. We mean by South India all the land lying south of the 
Vindhyas— Dakshina (the Deccan) in the widest sense of the 
term. Our knowledge of the history of this region has been 
greatly advanced during the last fifty years by many important 
discoveries, archseological and literary. Much of this new 
source-material lies embedded in the inaccessible periodical 
reports of the different branches of the Archaeological Survey of 
India, and of the more important Indian states, such as Hydera- 
bad, Mysore and Travancore. Scholars, none too many, have 
addressed themselves to the task of interpreting the data and 
have written learned monographs mostly confined to particular 
dynasties and topics; these are very helpful as far as they go, 
but by their very nature cannot give a general idea of the main 
lines of movement in the history of politics and culture. 
Sir R. G. Bhandarkar’s Early History of the Deccan (189S) 
is the nearest approach to a general history; but that brilliant 
work is now outdated and does not deal with the history of the 
extreme South. 

In general histories of India, the part of the country 
with which we are concerned figures only in a small way 
Vincent Smith rightly observed: ‘Hitherto most historians of 
ancient India have written as if the South did not exist’, and 
explained this neglect of the South in two ways. ‘The historian 
of India,’ he said, ‘is bound by the nature of things to direct 
his attention primarily to the North, and is able to give only a 


2 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

secondary place to the story of the Deccan plateau and the far 
South.’ Again, ‘the northern record is far less imperfect than 
that of the peninsula. Very little is known definitely concerning 
the southern kingdoms before A.D. 600, whereas the history of 
Hindustan may be carried back twelve centuries earlier. The 
extreme deficiency of really ancient records concerning the 




SURVEY OF THE SOURCES 3 

many interesting analogies between the results of these early 
culture-contacts in these different lands has not yet been 
attempted and lies beyond the scope of this book; but we 
should do well to remember that the history of India has 
been too long studied more or less exclusively in isolation 
and from the continental point of view, little regard being 
paid to the maritime side of the story. The Satavahanas were 
described as ‘lords of the three oceans’ and promoted overseas 
colonization and trade. Under them Buddhist art attained the 
superb forms of beauty and elegance preserved to this day in 
the cave-temples of western India and the survivals from the 
stupas of Amaravati, Goli, Nagarjunikonda and other places in 
the Krishna valley; and the tradition was continued long after 
the Satavahanas by their successors both in the eastern 
and western Deccan. The latter half of Satavahana rule in the 
Deccan coincides with the age of the literature of the Sangam 
in Tamil and of active trade between India and the Roman 
empire in the west, and there is good reason to believe that 
the plastic arts of the Deccan in this period and the succeeding 
one owed something to Graeco-Roman models and artists. 

After the close of the Sangam epoch, from about a.d. 300 
to a.d. 600, there is an almost total lack of information regard- 
ing occurrences in the Tamil land. Some time about a.d. 300 
or a little later the whole country was upset by the predatory 
activities of the Kalabhras who are described as evil rulers who 
overthrew numberless chieftains ( adhirajar ) of the land and got 
a stranglehold on the country. With the overthrow of the 
Kalabhras opens the new era of Pandya-Pallava achievements 
from the close of the sixth century a.d. This obscure period 
of Tamil history was marked in the Deccan proper by the 
rise into prominence of several dynasties of kings who divided 
among themselves the heritage of the Satavahana empire, kept 
up its administrative and political system, and carried forward 
its artistic and cultural traditions. The Abhiras and Trai- 
kutakas in the north-west, the Vakatakas in Berar, the 
Ikshvakus, Salankayanas and Vishnukundins in the eastern 
Deccan, and the Chutus, Kadambas, Gangas and Pallavas in 
the south Deccan are the most notable among these dynasties. 
Buddhism and Jainism made considerable progress in this 
period, the former inspiring the art of Ajanta, the Andhra 






SURVEY OF THE SOURCES 5 

raise in the succeeding epoch one of the most splendid empires 
known to history, almost disappears from the political map ot 
the Tamil country; and it is not known what relation, if any, 
the Telugu-Chodas of the Renadu country in the Ceded Dis- 
tricts, one of the minor dynasties of this epoch, bore to their 
namesakes of the Tamil land, though they claimed descent 
from Karikala, the most celebrated of the early Chola monarchs 
of the Sangam Age. The Pandya-Pallava period was marked by 
striking developments in religion, literature and art. Sanskrit 
held an honoured place as the language of higher literature 
and culture, and the Ganga monarch Durvinita had claims to 
authorship both in Sanskrit and in Kannada. The Pallava king, 
Mahendravarman I, aptly styled vicitra-citta—' wonderful-mind’ — 
was author, architect, musician and painter. In his time there 
arose a strong reaction against the growing influence of ] ainism 
and Buddhism, which found expression in a widespread bhakti 
movement among the worshippers of Siva and Vishnu; the 
leaders of this movement were known as Nayanars and Alvars, 
and their exuberant devotional songs, gathered later in the 
collections known as the Devaram and the Divyaprabandham, 
celebrate every orthodox shrine they visited many times 
over in the course of their propagandist peregrinations, and 
constitute the most priceless treasure in all Tamil literature. 
The great Kumarila and the still greater Sankara also lived and 
taught in the same age, the former restating the principles of 
Vedic exegesis and upholding the religion of sacrifice, the latter 
expounding the fundamentals of monistic vedanta with unsur- 
passed power and brilliance. The temples and sculptures of the 
period register the highest perfection of form that their arts 
attained in the South. Mamallapuram (Mababalipuram) and 
Kanchipuram (Conjeevaram) are the best museums of this art 

The rise of the imperial Cholas of the line of Vijayalaya 
may be dated from the middle of the ninth century a.d. As 
they emerged from their obscurity, they soon displaced the 
remnants of Pallava power to the north of their capital Tanjore, 
and subdued the Pandya and Chera countries in the south and 
invaded Ceylon. The hostility of the Rashtrakutas, particularly 
of Krishna III, threatened to wreck the Chola empire at its 
birth (c. 950), but the Karnataka power was operating too far 






parent empire. Ruling territory contiguous to the Chola empire, 
the Hoysalas not only aggrandize themselves partly at its 
expense, but intercede with effect in the politics of the far 
South; they protect the Chola monarchs from the aggressions 
of their overgrown vassals. At the beginning of the thirteenth 
century the Pandya line begins to throw up a succession of able 
and powerful monarchs, and the northern half of the Chola 
empire is dominated by the ambition and turbulence of Kop- 
perunjinga, a chieftain who claimed descent from the Pallavas. 
The help of the Hoysalas secures a brief respite for the Chola 
kingdom, but the inevitable end soon overtakes it and by the 
middle of the century the whole of the Tamil country and the 
east coast right up to Nellore passes under the Pandyas. 
Hoysala efforts to check the growth of Pandyan power were not 
attended by any conspicuous success, nor did the Telugu-Chodas 
fare better in the enterprise. 




fourteenth. 
: South; and 











facts, persons and tendencies of outstanding importance — minor 
details being everywhere eschewed in order not to distract the 
attention of the reader by an array of names and details that 
often serve only to obscure the main trends. 

The study of the subject is still in its initial stages and 
there is scope for widely different views and interpreta- 
tions at almost every stage of the story. The plan of this 
book does not allow of elaborate discussions of rival authorities 


however, to choose the most reasonable reconstructions for 
presentation; but it is too much to expect that all of them will 
satisfy every reader. Several of the conclusions set forth will 
be found argued at some length in the works to which reference 
is made at the end of each chapter. 

‘Attention has been concentrated too long on the North, on 
Sanskrit books, and on Indo-Aryan notions,’ said Vincent Smith. 
‘It is time’, he added, ‘that due regard should be paid to the 








ever before. But chronology is the skeleton of history, and f 
the most part the establishment of a dependable chronoloj 
necessarily rests on an adequate study of political history; ai 
when large sections of that history are still in the process 
being studied and there remains scope for differences of opinit 
on a number of unsettled questions, the historian is obliged 
devote rather more attention to the political side if he is to mal 


so much attract our attention were often splendid promoters of 
culture and the arts besides being the upholders of society and 
the protectors of the people. Their history, if pursued on a 
proper scale and with a full knowledge of the sources, will 
often be seen to verge on that true history of the life of the 
people which the critics of dry-as-dust history pine for. 



known that they deserve to be set forth at some length before 
we proceed to sketch the main lines of cultural movements in 
the land. 


Inscriptions are the most copious and authentic source of 
Indian history, particularly of South Indian history. The 
earliest are in the Brahmi script and constitute the southern 








SURVEY OF THE SOURCES 15 

century A.D. inscriptions composed altogether in the popular 
speech become very common, though Sanskrit continues to be 
employed wholly or in part in other records and holds an 
honoured place everywhere as the test medium of cultural 
intercourse. The script undergoes many changes and evolves, 
in the Deccan, into the ancestor of the modern Telugu and 
Kannada scripts while farther south its evolution first assumes 
the early form of Grantha known from the Pallava inscriptions 
of the seventh and eighth centuries, and then undergoes 
modifications under the influence of the Tamil alphabet in its 
two forms — Tamil properly so called and Vatteluttu or round 
hand. The origin of these two scripts is by no means definitely 
settled yet. It may be noted however that Biihler held it 
probable that the Tamil alphabet was derived from a northern 
alphabet of the fourth or fifth century which in course of time 
was strongly influenced by the Grantha used in the Tamil 
districts for writing Sanskrit. He also pointed out that ‘the 
Vatteluttu may be described as a cursive script, which bears the 
same relation to the Tamil as the modern northern alphabets 
of the clerks and merchants to their originals, e.g. the Modi of 
the Marathas to the Balbodh and the Takari of the Dogras to 
the Sarada’. The Vatteluttu went out of use in the Tamil 
country about the tenth century a.d. though it continued in 
use till much later on the west coast. 

The early Pallava-Grantha script in the stage when it is 
yet little differentiated from the ancestor of Telugu-Kannada was 
carried by Hindu colonists across the seas to west Java, Borneo 
and Indo-China, the earliest stone inscriptions in this script 
from these places dating from about A.D 400. The language 
of these early colonial inscriptions is Sanskrit. 

Stone inscriptions begin to increase in number steadily 
from the sixth century onwards, but copper-plate records con- 
tinue to be the mainstay of the historian for some centuries 
more, and at no time can they be left out of the reckoning. 
The history of the early Pandyas from the seventh to the tenth 
century A.D. rests altogether on two long copper-plate records 
which are both bilingual and employ the Grantha script for 
the Sanskrit and the Vatteluttu for the Tamil parts; so also 
the history of the contemporary Pallava line of Simhavishnu is 
derived more from copper plates than from stone inscriptions. 






few records which give some idea of the conditions of maritime 

Almost every inscription on stone or copper, unless it is 
the very brief record of a mere name or small gift, is 
seen to follow a definite order. The opening is generally 
an invocation, either a brief formula in prose, a verse or 
sometimes a number of verses invoking either one deity or 
several deities one after another. Then follows a preamble, 
the prasasti, in which the names and achievements of the ruler 
and his ancestors are narrated, sometimes in a set form which 
is common to several records of the reign; it is this part which 
is generally most valuable to the student of political history. 
After this comes a description of the actual donor, if he 
happens to be other than the king, together with details oi 
his achievements and those of his ancestors, with a similai 
but generally briefer description of the donee and his ancestrj 
where he is an individual. If the gift is made to a group 
or an institution, that is described in some detail. Next 
there is a description of the object given — money, cattle, taxes, 
and so on; often it is land, and then the boundaries of the land 
are carefully specified. Then comes the formula of gift which 
usually says that it is given with water poured out from 
the hand of the donor into that of the donee for his perpetual 
and undisturbed enjoyment. The record concludes with an 
imprecation on anyone who may terminate the charity or 
otherwise disturb it, and praise of those who will maintain and 
protect it in the future. This analysis of the different parts of 


A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

iption indicates roughly their relative value to 

ie longer inscriptions are dedicatory and com- 
nd often contain valuable praiastis of long 
; the Aihole inscription of the reign of PulakeSin 




SURVEY OF THE SOURCES 


the Kaliyuga and the date arrived at supplies satisfactory 
verification of the other details recorded. In giving the regnal 
years of kings, the Pandyan inscriptions often mention one 
year opposite another; the exact significance of this has 
not been understood, and epigraphists are agreed in adding up 
the figures and treating the total as the year of the reign when 
the inscription was issued. 

Inscriptions can by no means be said always to speak the 
truth, much less the whole truth; legends and exaggera- 
tions are often found, and easily recognized as such: more 
difficult is the task of detecting the truth behind partisan 
statements made by the composers of records of different 
dynasties engaged in constant warfare. The instances are not 
few in which both parties claim victory in a war, and there is 
often some kind of justification for the claim. And much work 
still remains to be done in the study and interpretation of the 
social and economic information contained in the inscriptions 
— work that has been delayed mainly by the slackness of the 
Epigraphical Department in publishing the texts. 

Closely allied to the evidence of inscriptions on stone 
and copper is that of the shorter legends on coins. But the 
coinage of South India ‘presents greater difficulties to the 
student and offers less reward for his labours than that of the 
North’. Really ancient coins are rare and contain no dates 
and few intelligible legends, often only the ruler’s name 
or title; also; the devices upon them are often crude and 
indistinct. The rectangular pieces of impure silver bearing 
several punch-marks, the purdnas (eldlings) of the law books, 
were common to both Northern and Southern India and 
certainly belong to the centuries before Christ; copper punch- 
marked coins were also known, and this type of coinage 
may be taken to have gone out of circulation about A.D. 
200. In later times the principal coinage of the South 
was struck in gold, not silver; copper was used for smaller 
denominations. Of gold coins there were generally two 
denominations : the vardha — perhaps deriving its name from the 
Chalukya crest of a boar, also called port, hurt, pagoda (from 
bhagavatil) and pardaos (Portuguese) — usually weighing a 
kalanju (Molucca bean), or 50 to 60 grains ; and the fanam, being 
a tenth of the vardha, its weight, 5 to 6 grains, conforming to 



20 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

the manjadi. The earliest gold coins are spherules of plain gold 
bearing a minute punch-mark; a little later came the padma- 
tanhas which were thin cup-shaped pieces stamped with 
punches, at first on one side only and then on both; and finally 
came the die-struck pieces of which the thick, small Vijayanagar 






jeginning of the nineteenth century to the orders of Col. Colin 
Mackenzie do not concern us as they deal with recent events 
>utside the scope of this book. The Kongu-deSa-rajakkal caritram 
ind the Keralolpatti in its various recensions have often been 
>verrated and are in fact of very little value; so too are the 
lumberless stltala-purdnas, mostly recent redactions of popular 
egends. Ballads like the Ramappayyan-ammanai are in a some- 
what better class, but no early specimens of such popular 
[uasi-historical material have survived. 

While the direct contribution to history from literary sources 
s thus seen to be of little importance, the indirect value 
o the historian of a study of the literatures of the country 



OF SOOTH INDIA 
t only do they enable him to picture 
:u in which the characters of history 
t the prologues, epilogues and 
Ften embody valuable data on 
: the authors of the works and 
often eke out the scrappy 





SURVEY 


THE SOURCES 


ancient commentary on the celebrated Iraiyanar Agapporul ; 
though the verses of the kovai mention the names of several 
battles fought by the Pandya rulers of the line of Kadungon, 
yet the hero of the poem seems to have been not any single 
king of the line, but a composite figure to whom the poet 
attributes the achievements of the entire dynasty: the adoption 
of such literary conventions was quite common, and without 
great caution one is apt to be easily misled by them. The 
Nandik-kalambakam, which has Pallava Nandivarman III for 
hero, is much more trustworthy and of real value on the history 
of the time. Somewhat richer in historical content are a few 
works of a quasi-historical nature that belong to the imperial 
Chola period ; prominent among them are the Kahngattiip-parani 
of Jayangondar, treating of the invasion of Kalinga by the 
Chola forces in the reign of Kulottunga I, and the three ulas 
of Ottakkuttan on three successive monarchs — Vikrama Chola, 
Kulottunga II and Rajaraja II. In Kannada, the Pampa-bharata 
and Ranna’s Gadayuddha , though mainly devoted to themes 
from the Great Epic, shed much welcome light on contemporary 
Rashtrakuta and Chalukya history because the authors have 
chosen to identify their patrons with some of the epic charac- 
ters and find occasion to introduce into their narrative several 
historical incidents very well known to them. Bilhana’s 





SURVEY OF 1 


he is sometimes inaccurate ir 
of the Adil Shahis of Bijapur 




Purvey of the sources 27 

Indo-China and the archipelago were in active touch with South 
India on the one side and China on the other: they are said to 
have sent to the Chinese court on many occasions presents ot' 
vaidiirya (the semi-precious ‘cat’s eye’), sandalwood and pearls 
which are specifically South Indian products. Fa-hien did not 
visit the mainland of South India: he took ship from Tamluk 
to Ceylon, and his account of the Deccan and the ‘pigeon 
monastery’ is just edifying gossip. Many Buddhist monks went 
from South India and Ceylon to China by sea and settled 






SURVEY OF THE SOURCES 29 

Gulf, no great traveller himself, had many opportunities of 
meeting much-travelled merchants and scholars, the celebrated 
Masudi among them. Abu Zaid declares (916) that his object 
was to supplement an earlier work on India and China with data 
drawn from his own studies and talks with persons who had 
travelled in the eastern countries. Abu Zaid’s predecessor 
who wrote his work in 85 1 has often been identified with the 
merchant Suleiman who seems, however, to have been only 
one of the sources of information commanded by that unknown 
writer. Ibn al-Fakih, another writer of the early tenth century 
who slightly preceded Abu Zaid and Masudi, also drew largely 
upon this anonymous writer; in fact it is a common trait of 
Arab writers to copy one another extensively and this absolves 
us from noticing in any detail many other authors of the tenth 
century. The illustrious Alberuni (1030) has little on South 
India and the celebrated historian and geographer Abulfeda 
(1273-1331) marks no great advance in knowledge relating to 
India. His notices of South India are brief, vague and 
second-hand, though he cites quite often the inveterate traveller 
and geographer Ibn Said (1214-86). The last and perhaps the 
most important Arab writer we must notice is the indefatigable 
Moorish explorer Ibn Batuta. Born in Tangier about 1300, he 
left his native place at the age of twenty-two, and continued 
to travel incessantly for the next thirty years. He died at Fez 
in 1377. He spent many years in India during the time when 
the mad tyranny of Muhammad bin Tughlak drove all the 
governors of provinces into open revolt, and led to the rise of 
independent kingdoms in different parts of the empire. By 
profession a doctor of the Muhammadan law and traditions, he 
was a good liver and keen observer of men and affairs. A good 
part of his work is devoted to an account of his travels and 
experiences in South India, and contains much accurate 
information on the state of politics, religion and society at 

To turn lastly to the European travellers in India after 
Cosmas, it has been doubted if the Jewish traveller from Spain 
Benjamin of Tudela (e. 1170), ever visited India, though 
he has some interesting remarks to offer on Quilon and its 
trade. With Marco Polo, the ‘prince of medieval travellers’, 
begins a new epoch in the direct contacts between Europe and 








SOURCES 










CHAPTER II 


THE LAND IN RELATION TO HISTORY 



In this chapter we shall attempt to give a general description 
of the geography of the country to serve as the foundation for 
the historical chapters which follow. Our concern is primarily 
with the land lying to the south of the Vindhyas, that rugged 
mountainous tract varying much in width and elevation and 
stretching almost east to west along the Tropic of Cancer. On 
the northern side of the Vindhyas the slope is gentle and there 
are no well-marked spurs or steep valleys; on the southern side. 







South India (Physical) 



the Indian Ocean and were cited by the Arab geographers of 
the Middle Ages. An early account of the ports of peninsular 
India and the conditions of maritime trade is found in the 
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. 

The nucleus of the peninsula is a triangular block of very 
old rocks that covers its greater part from the Satmala-Ajanta 
ranges to the Nilgiris. This has a typical plateau relief: its 
western edge is a steep brink, the Western Ghats, overlooking 
the west coast formed by a narrow strip of rough, wet lowland; 
its surface has a gentle fall to a lower brink in the east, the 
Eastern Ghats. Between the Eastern Ghats and the Coromandel 
coast is a belt of lowland, the Carnatic, much wider, smoother 
and relatively drier than the western strip. 

Seen from the west the Western Ghats present the appear- 
ance of a gigantic sea-wall, often rising in steps from the shore- 
line — hence the name ‘ghats’. They are a steep and rugged 
mass of hills, little more than 2,000 feet above sea-level at the 
northern end, rising to more than 4,000 about the latitude of 
Bombay, generally increasing in altitude towards the south 
and culminating in the Nilgiris with Dodabetta at a height 
of 8,760 feet where the Eastern Ghats meet the Western after 
making a sweep from the other side of the peninsula. Immedi- 
ately south of the Nilgiri plateau lies the only break in the 
continuity of the Western Ghats, the Palghat or Coimbatore 
gap, which is about twenty miles from north to south and 
affords lowland access from the Carnatic to the Malabar coast at 
a level of about a thousand feet above the sea. This easy road 
into the Carnatic from Cochin and Calicut and other ports on the 



HISTORY 




Bhaja and Bedsa. The Amba Pass carrying the road from 
Ratnagiri to Kolhapur, and the passes providing less important 
routes from Vengurla to Belgaum, Karwar to Dharwar, and so on, 
need not be mentioned. The Shencottah Ghat and the 
Aramboli Pass form the two southernmost passes providing 
routes between Travancore and the Pandya country. 

‘The precipitous square-cut peaks, which give such a 
fantastic appearance to the scenery of the Western Ghats, are 
to be found wherever horizontal strata of varying degrees of 
resistance are subject to sub-aerial denudation. They repeat 
themselves in the droogs of Deccan scenery.’ 


In South India the Anamalai hills form the most striking 
range; the higher range consists of a series of plateaux 7,000 
feet in elevation running up to peaks of over 8,000. They 



belts of the same elevation; much valuable game, including 
elephant which gives its name to the range, are also found 
there. It is inhabited by hill tribes like the Kadan, Muduvan 
and Pulaiyan. 

The Eastern Ghats possess little of the magnificence gained 
by the regular structure but irregular outlines of the ghats of 
the west. They are scattered, broken, and of much lower 
altitude, though geologically they seem to be distinctly older 
than the Western Ghats. Beginning in Orissa, they pass into 




Cuddapah quartzite 
: height is less than 




THE LAND IN RELATION TO HISTORY 


country strikingly different from the trap region. The ex- 
tensive vista of level-topped, square-crested, nearly horizontal 
lava-capped hills gives place to more rounded and graceful 
dome-shaped hills and knolls in the south. Many of these 
circular or nearly circular hills rise precipitously from the 
surrounding gneissic plain, and their strategic value was 
appreciated by successive rulers of the land who erected 
extensive and sometimes impregnable fortifications on them. 



HISTORY O] 



THE LAND IN RELATION TO HISTORY 41 
valleys, but as they approach the more level ground of the 
coastal plain, dams have been thrown across all of them and 
their waters turned to account for irrigation. The deltas of 
the Godavari, Krishna and Kaveri are covered with wide 
expanses of irrigated crops. 

The Godavari is surpassed in India only by the Ganges 
and the Indus for its sanctity, the picturesque scenery of its 
course, and its utility to man. Rising in the hills behind 
Trimbak in the Nasik district, within fifty miles of the Arabian 
Sea, it runs a course of 900 miles before reaching the Bay 
of Bengal and drains an area of 112,000 square miles. Above 
Nasik it flows along a narrow rocky bed, but farther east 
the banks are lower and more earthy. Below Sironcha 
it is joined on its left by the Pranhita, carrying the combined 
waters of the Wardha and the Wainganga which drain 
the whole of the Satpura and Nagpur plains. A few miles 
farther down it receives the Indravati which drains the 
wild and thickly forested areas of the Eastern Ghats in 
Bastar and its neighbours. Below this confluence the river 
strikes a predominantly south-easterly course till it joins 
the sea. Half-way, where it is nearest Madhya Pradesh, the 
bed of the river is broad and sandy, from one to two miles 
in width, and interrupted by rocks in only two places. After 
running placidly through this flat and monotonous country, 
it begins to force its way across the Eastern Ghats by a deep 
and narrow gorge barely 200 yards wide, on either side of 
which the picturesque wooded slopes of the hills rise almost 
sheer from the dark waters of the river. Once across the 
ghats, the river opens out again and forms a series of 
broad reaches dotted with low alluvial islands — the lankas - 
Below Rajahmundry it forks into two— the Gautami Godavari 
on the east and the Vasistha Godavari on the west which with 
their distributaries flow down the fan-shaped delta formed in 
the course of ages by the silt the river has deposited. Below 
Rajahmundry the river has been dammed at DowleSvaram 
from where high-level channels take the water for irrigating 
an enormous area of the country. The main canals are also, 
used as lines of communication. 

Shorter by a hundred miles in its course than the Godavari, 
and perhaps less sacred in popular estimation than either the 



• a total run of 400 miles. The bed 
the Tungabhadra is rocky, and the 




THE LAND IN RELATION TO HISTORY 43 
country along the course of the united stream rises rapidly 
away from the river rendering difficult the use of its waters for 
irrigation. The river is perennial in character and comes down 
in frequent heavy rushes during the rains. It was dammed by 
the rulers of Vijayanagar near Hampi for watering the palaces 
and gardens of that great city. 

The Tungabhadra has served as a historic natural frontier 
right through the centuries; the Chalukyas of Badami, the 
Rashtrakutas, and the Chalukyas of Kalvani to its north, and 
the Pallavas and Cholas to its south, not to speak of the 
Gangas who were mostly subordinate to one or other of these 
powers, made several attempts to extend their sway across the 
river and only met with indifferent success. The historic 
city of Vijayanagar and its predecessor Kampili rose on the 
southern bank of the Tungabhadra. And the Raichur doab 
between the Tungabhadra and Krishna might well be called 
‘the cockpit of the Deccan’. 

The Kaveri, known as the southern Ganges, has a course 
of 475 miles and is equally famous for its sanctity, its picturesque 
scenery and its usefulness for irrigation. Tamil literature 
cherishes many traditions of its origin and is replete with 
expressions of pious and fervent admiration for the life-giving 



44 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

tributaries in its course across Mysore, the most important 
being the Kabbani, the Hemavati and the Arkavati. In the 
plain, the course of the river is strongly controlled by the 
structure of the country as is well shown by its straight course 
and acute bends. After the confluence of the Bhavani, it 
changes its southern for a south-eastern direction and then 
takes an east-south-easterly course before forking a third time 




THE LAND IN RELATION TO HISTORY 45 

The Tapti (436 miles in length), rising on the Satpura 
plateau near Multai, flows through a straight and steep-sided 
valley, locally opening out to form wide alluvial plains, to the 
Gulf of Cambay which it joins by an estuary. Its banks are too 
high (30 to 60 feet) for the water to be used for irrigation while 
the frequent rocky ridges crossing the river render navigation 
impossible except for the last 20 miles of its course. The 
Khandesh plain in the middle Tapti valley is the most northern 
section of the Deccan; stretching for 150 miles east to west it 
is an extensive area of rich alluvial black soil, a land of large and 
prosperous towns. Physically it merges eastward into the 
Nagpur plain characterized by the same type of land use. The 
rugged hilly and forested regions adjoining the river were 
breeding-grounds for wild elephants until about the seventeenth 
century. 

The Gulf of Cambay was once frequented by Arab mariners, 
and in the early days Broach was more prominent than the 
better port of Surat which rose only after the silting up of the 
Narmada estuary and the advent of the European traders who 
first came to India round the Cape of Good Hope. Besides the 



lore creating the beautiful, and also typical, coastal 
Malabar. The backwaters, which are elongated 






RELATION TO HISTORY 



cotton and sugarcane. The coast of the delta was the site of some 
of the earliest settlements of Europeans in India, the Dutch, 
French and English having all established factories there; the 
channels of the rivers which led to these have since largely 
silted up. 6 3 

Half lake, half swamp, Lake Colair is the only large natural 
freshwater lake in Madras. Originally a part of the Bay it has 
been cut off from it by the growth of the two river deltas 
which, growing year after year, pushed out farther and farther 
into the sea until the northern end of the one joined the southern 
extremity of the other. Lake Colair is known to history as 
Kolanu, and its chieftains, the Saronathas, played a fairly 
prominent part in the history of the Andhra country. 




48 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

In the Coromandel area the ghats, as noted already Uim 
r m tVie coast to converge with the Western Ghats in 
the a NUgSs There are offshoots like the Javadi Shevaroy. 
Pachdmalai, and so on, which retain something of the plateau 
aspect- but the Carnatic or the Tamil plain increases in width 
steadily southwards until in the Kaveri basin it sketches for 
about 170 miles. This plain presents a great contrast to the 
other parts of the coastal plains and to the Deccan plateau in 
topography, in climate and in history. This is the real old 


CHAPTER III 

THE EARLIEST PEOPLES AND CULTURES 


abject and 





the old stone stage, very similar w ’ 

have also been found to occur in South Africa; the resemblance 
is not confined to the types but even extends to the technique 
of manufacture. ..... 

The transition from the old stone to the ‘new stone (neolithic) 
stage was long-drawn-out, and this intermediate period, the 
‘mesolithic’ stage, lasted down to about 4000 B.c. in peninsular 
India. This stage is characterized by very small stone implements, 
microliths. Whereas the material used for paleolithic tools was 
quartzite, in the mesolithic stage quartzite gave place to flint 




I jasper (mesolithic) but traj 
ieveral different types of adzes, 







Farsistan, Southern Iran, Shat-el-Arab in Mesopotamia, South 
Baluchistan and Afghanistan. 

A third element is furnished by the proto-Mediterranean type 
with its long narrow head and face, nose of medium length and 
straight or aquiline shape, and dark brown hair. This is the 
dominant type among the Dravidian-speaking peoples of South 
India at the present day. The microlithic-mesolithic man of 
Gujarat and of South India — and the microlithic industry, 
coastal as well as inland, is merely an extension of that of 
the Sabarmati valley and Sind — was proto-Mediterranean with 
marked negroid characteristics. This is seen from the skulls 
found at Langhnaj in Baroda (mesolithic) and at Chanhu-Daro 







THE EARLIEST PEOPLES AND CULTURES 55 
tains of Anatolia and along the western shores of the Adriatic. 
The ancient Hittites were typical members of the Armenoid 
race. The prehistoric inhabitants of Shah Tepe in Asterabad, the 
province bordering the Caspian on its south-east, were short- 
headed. The present-day population of Armenia and Trans- 
Caucasia is short-headed. In Luristan, the highland of Persia 
on the border of Mesopotamia between Hamadan and Sushan, 
in the second millennium B.c. we have a short-headed people. 
The basic stock of the highland zone, Herzfeld’s ‘Caspian’, 
from which the Hurrians, the Kassites, the Elamites and the 
Mitanni were derived, was round-headed. 

In South India the Armenoid type is found especially among 
the Tamil-speaking people. But this type could not have arisen 
in South India. The present home of this type — the 
wide tract of Asia stretching from the Pamirs to the Levant — 
must also have been its original home, that is to say the area 
of its characterization. According to Keith, the Armenoid in 
India is the result of an early trade migration from Persia (Iran) 
or an adjacent country along the Persian Gulf. Round- 
headedness among the Tamils can be traced through the 
Deccan, Gujarat and Sind into the eastern portions of the 
Iranian plateau where there is a striking group of round-heads. 
In Iran they are more numerous in the uplands than in the 
plains. Some writers postulate a connexion between these round- 
heads of the Iranian plateau and uplands and the Dravidian- 
speakers of India, a connexion borne out by resemblances 
between the culture of the Caspians, the earliest inhabitants of 
the highlands of Iran, and the Dravidian-speakers. 

The fact that Andhrade£a and Kerala — Andhrade^a to a lesser 
degree than Kerala — are free from the round-headed (Alpine- 
Armenoid) element, shows that it came in by way of Sind, 
Gujarat and Maharashtra, and broke into Tamilnad over 
south-eastern Mysore. If numbers be any criterion, the round- 
heads who constitute a small percentage when compared with 
the basic long-heads (proto-Mediterranean and Mediterranean) 
are later arrivals in India — a conclusion supported by the 
evidence on the succession of race strata elsewhere. 

Lastly, there remains to be noticed another progressive long- 
headed element, the Nordic, which entered South India in late 
prehistoric times. Deriving from the same original stock, the 






particular race was responsible for the introduction of the 
Austro-Asiatic languages into India. The proto-Australoid, the 
Mongolian and the proto-Mediterranean have all been suggested 
by different writers. Racial prehistory when correlated with 
linguistic prehistory seems to suggest the following provisional 
general conclusions. Indo-Aryan was the latest language family 
to reach India, and it seems reasonable to ascribe it to the 
Nordics, the last ethnic element to arrive. But the Nordics 
were by no means a pure stock when they entered India; on 
their way they must have absorbed much of the Alpine element 
of the Pamirs and their neighbourhood. For a similar reason, 
Dravidian must have been the speech of the round-heads, 
particularly the Armenoids who represent the earlier amongst 
the two strata of round-heads in India, and Austric the 
language of the Mediterraneans. About the language of the 
other ethnic elements noted above we have no knowledge. 

Dravidian language and culture hark back to the highlands of 
Anatolia, Armenia and Iran, the area of characterization of the 
Armenoid type. The script of the Indus-valley seals has not 
yet been satisfactorily deciphered, and this casts a shadow of 
doubt over all the problems of pre-Aryan Indian culture. Yet 
there are not wanting many indications that point to some 
connexion between the great culture-complex that spread from 
the Mediterranean to the Indus valley in the third and second 
millennia B.c. and the prehistoric culture of South India. The 
name Trimmlai by which the Lycians of Asia Minor called 
themselves in their inscriptions is a very close approach to 
Dramila (Tamil). Caldwell indicated a connexion between Susian 
and Dravidian as regards structure. A large number of ancient 
place-names in Afghanistan, the highlands of Iran, the plains 
of the Euphrates and the Tigris, and Mesopotamia generally, 
have been shown to conform to Dravidian forms, and the 
non-Semitic, non-Aryan prehistoric peoples of this region have 
been held to have been Dravidian-speaking. The parallels 
between Mitanni and Dravidian are so many as to bring Mitanni 
well within the group; they are seen to extend over the whole 
field of phonology, grammar and vocabulary. Not only Mitanni 




and even the structure of the temple itself have much in 
common with what has prevailed in South India to this day, 
allowance being made for the changes that naturally flowed 
from the increasing aversion to meat-eating among the higher 
classes of India. ‘The essence of worship’, says Leonard 
Woolley of ancient Sumer; 'was sacrifice, and by the ritual of 
sacrifice the cooked flesh of the animal was shared between the 
god, his priests and the worshipper; the kitchen was therefore 
not the least important part of the temple, and at all times of 
the day the fires would be burning and the priests would be 
overseeing the slaves who carried on the work of butchers, 
bakers, scullions and cooks.’ Numerous medieval inscriptions 
of Southern India bear abundant testimony to the readiness 
of the people to enrol themselves as the slaves of a neighbour- 




THE EARLIEST PEOPLES AND CULTURES 59 
as a description of the form and spirit of worship in the Indian 
temple of today, of the rajopacara offered to the image of 
God, than this account given by Woolley of worship in the 
Sumerian temple: ‘Where the God was also the King, where 
church and state were so nearly synonymous, material efficiency 
was only too likely to get the better of faith. Long life and 
well-being in this world was the reward men asked in return 
for formal service such as they might have rendered to a human 
overlord, and they regarded the wealth and prosperity of the 
Moon-god as a pledge for the welfare of the city.’ The temple 
and the palace are both indicated by one word koyil in Tamil, 
and prasada in Sanskrit, and it is universally recognized that 
temple-worship was not part of the original Vedic religion. 

The painted pottery from prehistoric burials in South India 
is in the tradition of Tepe Hissar (Iran) and the terra-cotta 
sarcophagi are similar to those excavated in Susa in 1930-1 and 
dating from the twenty-fifth to the fifteenth century B.c. The 
elephant-legged urn from the Sabarmati valley is matched only 
by a similar urn from Qatna in Syria. It is not suggested 
that the South Indian specimens are contemporary with those 
from western Asia, but their similarities show an unmistakable 
connexion between them, the continuance in South India of a 
cultural tradition that arose in lands lying to the west. 

Another very intriguing problem in the prehistory of 
peninsular India is the age of its large stone (megalithic) 
monuments. Strictly speaking not all the monuments, except 
a few menhirs and alignments, can be called great stone monu- 
ments or megaliths. Some of them no doubt reach back to 
the neolithic stage. The majority, however, belong to the 
metal-using stage that followed. Some are modem. The fact 
that the practice of erecting stone cists obtains at the present 
day amongst certain primitive tribes, and also that coins of 
the early centuries of the Christian era — and these not from 
sealed deposits — have been found in some of them, should not be 
taken as proof that none of the existing megalithic monuments 
is prehistoric. 

These monuments in South India show a great variety in 
their surface indications and internal structure, and there is no 
part of the country which does not possess one or more of the 
several types. But dolmens and menhirs are the two funda- 






THE EARLIEST PEOPLES AND CULTURES 61 
The gold mouth-pieces from Adichanallur have no parallels 
in other prehistoric sites in India. They are embossed with 
ornamental geometrical designs and some have holes cut at the 
ends. Similar mouth-pieces have been found at Enkomi in 
Cyprus in tombs of the late bronze age. In Palestine patterned 
gold fillets or head-bands date back to 2000 B.c. in one site 
(Gaza), while in another (Gerar) gold frontlets similar to the 
Adichanallur diadems have been discovered and held to belong 
to about 1200 B.c. These frontlets on the second site were 
found in association with kohl-sticks which also have their 
parallels at Adichanallur. Again, iron hoes similar to those from 
Adichanallur, which have no parallels in other prehistoric sites 
in India, have been found in Palestine near the two sites 
mentioned above, and these specimens have been dated about 
1150 B.c. Bronze hoes similar to the iron hoes from Adicha- 
nallur have been found in several localities in Cyprus. A 
pear-shaped stone drop, plated with gold-leaf, from Adicha- 
nallur is strongly reminiscent of an ear-ring of similar shape 
of late bronze age from Enkomi in Cyprus. Among the tombs 
of the early iron age of the time of Solomon in Palestine an 
outstanding find was a remarkable three-pronged fork or trident 
of iron. Many such iron tridents were discovered at Adicha- 
nallur. Urn-burials similar to those from Adichanallur have • 
been found at Qatna in Syria. The number, complexity and 
closeness of these similarities suggest a strong probability of 
connexion between the culture of Adichanallur and that of the 
eastern Mediterranean, and the absence of parallels in the rest 
of India also points to a foreign origin for this culture. Trade 
by sea between India and Egypt in the second millennium b.c. 
is attested to by many Egyptian records of the time which 
mention specifically South Indian products; and this contact 
with Mediterranean lands might even have begun earlier as it 
certainly continued into the first millennium b.c. and later. 
And in view of the dates suggested for the finds in Cyprus 
and Palestine, which are very similar to those of Adichanallur, 
a date in the twelfth century b.c. for the iron hoes and gold' 
diadems and mouth-pieces from that place does not appear 
improbable. 

The evidence from Adichanallur also appears to suggest 
that the worship of Murugan or Velan, a popular deity with 



62 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

the Tamils from very early times, was known at the time. 
The sod's favourite weapon was the vel (trident) and his 
banner carried a wild fowl as his emblem. Besides iron tridents, 
there have been found at Adichanallur iron banner-bases and 
representations of fowls in bronze. The practice of wearing 
mouth-pieces, still maintained by devotees carrying kavad, to 
the shrine of Murugan in the Palni hills, may well be a survival 
from prehistoric times. 

The people of Adichanallur cultivated rice ; several earthen- 
ware bowls containing the husk of paddy and bronze bowls 
with grains of rice in them have been found. 

The Nilgiri cairns and barrows are different from the 
megaliths of the plains both from the point of view of their 
structural details and the pottery associated with them. The 
bronze bowls which are the most outstanding among the finds 
here agree in shape and technique with the bronze bowls from 
Nimroud and Wan. Crooke first noticed their foreign character 
and subsequently Richards suggested a philogenetic connexion 
between one of the Nilgiri bronze vases and a gold bowl from 
Ur discovered by Woolley. In the bronze bowls of the Assyri- 
an period we find the features of the Ur gold vase persisting, 
and the Nilgiri bronze bowls were obviously imports from 
• Assyria. Like the bronze vases, the pottery associated with 
them is also exotic to South India. It is matched only by 
Assyrian pottery with shoulder grooves. The name Musrr 
belonging to a tribe to the north-east of Nineveh is almost the 
same as the ancient name Musiri of Cranganore; while the 
name Nairi, next-door neighbours of the Musri, may also- 






CHAPTER IV 

THE DAWN OF HISTORY: ARYANIZATION 

Evidence - ArySvarta - Vindhya and Pariyatra - Vidarbha - Growing 
knowledge of the South in North Indian literature — Pin.m — Katyayana 
Kautilya — Greek accounts — Baudhayana — ASokan edicts. 

Agastya legends and their significance - Parafurama and the west coast 
nature of aryanization- evidence of language -later reactions and theories 
- routes from north to south - contact with lands in the west — and in the east 


History begins in the South of India as in the North with 
the advent of the Aryans. The progress of the aryanization 
of the South is reflected in literature and legend. Until about 
600 B.C., works composed in the North exhibit little knowledge 



THE DAWN OF HISTORY 


Mutibas. Clearly, in the period of these books, while the 
aryanization of Northern India had become complete, little 
progress had been made beyond the Vindhyas; only one settled 
Aryan kingdom was known, Vidarbha, and the rest of the 
South was dominated by pre-Aryan inhabitants. Possibly 
some of the more enterprising Aryans ventured into their midst, 
married their women and raised families of mixed descent who 
were looked down upon by the ‘purer’ Aryans of the north, as 
may be inferred from the story of the sons of Visvamitra. It 
is difficult to fix any definite date for this stage of affairs, but 
round about 1000 B.c. may well be suggested. 

The next stage is marked by the mention of Cherapadah, the 
Cheras, in the Aitareya Aranyaka, as one of the three peoples 
who transgressed certain ancient injunctions; but the text is 
obscure and its meaning is by no means clearly settled. How- 
ever, if we accepted it as a reference to the Cheras, it would be 
proof that the customs and habits of Malabar began very early 
to diverge from those of the rest of the South. But of this we 
have no other early evidence. 

The grammarian Panini, who may be taken to have lived 
more or less about 600 b.c., mentions only Kalinga in the east 
and knows nothing south of the Narmada on the west except 
the country of Asmaka, near the headwaters of the Godavari. 
The Sutta Nipata of the Buddhist canon records that a teacher 
Bavari left Kosala and settled in a village on the Godavari in 
the Assaka country in Dakshinapatha. His pupils are said to have 
gone north to meet the Buddha and their route lay through 
Patitthana (Paithan) in the Mulaka country, Mahishmati 
(Mandhata) on the Narmada, and Ujjain. Bavari is said to have 
been learned in the Vedas and performed Vedic sacrifices. 
Probably we have in him the type of many a teacher who took 
part in the task of colonizing and aryanizing the southern lands 
by a process of slow and peaceful permeation. The descriptions 
of asramas, abodes of ascetics situated in the Dandaka forest, 
which are found in the Ramayana of Valmiki confirm the 
impression derived from the story of the teacher Bavari. 

Katyayana, the grammarian of the fourth century B.c., who 
was probably a southerner and who supplemented the aphorisms 
of Panini to bring his grammatical system up to date, makes 
mention of the countries of the extreme South, Pandya, Chola 









THE DAWN OF HISTORY 67 

but otherwise he is a real historical person who composes 
hymns, has a wife and sister and perhaps also a son; and he is 
applauded for combining domesticity with a life of austerity. 
In the Mahabharata the story is more fully developed, and 
Agastya’s connexion with the South comes into prominence. 
His marriage with Lopamudra, a princess of Vidarbha, is 
mentioned together with her demand that, before claiming the 
exercise of his marital rights, he should provide her with costly 
jewellery and all the luxuries she was used to in her 
father’s house, without in any manner impairing his asceticism. 
The only way in which Agastya could meet his wife’s wish was by 
seeking a large gift of wealth. He approached three Aryan kings 
one after another, but in vain, so they all went to Ilvala, the 
daitya king of Manimati. Ilvala, however, was no friend of the 
Brahmins, because one of them had refused to grant him a son 
equal to Indra. His vengeance took a queer form. He used to 
transform his younger brother Vatapi ‘into a ram and offer his 
flesh to Brahmins as food, and then to recall him to life (whom- 
soever Ilvala summoned with his voice would come back even 
from the abode of Yama), and Vatapi, ripping the flanks of the 
Brahmins, would .come out laughing’. The two brothers thus 
killed many Brahmins and, on the occasion of the visit of 
Agastya and the three kings, Ilvala wanted to play the same 
game. ‘He prepared the flesh of Vatapi in order to entertain 
them, at which the kings became sad, but Agastya ate it all, 
and when Ilvala summoned Vatapi there came only air out 
of Agastya’s stomach, Vatapi having already been digested. 
Then Ilvala, becoming sad, promised to give him wealth, if 
Agastya could tell him what he intended to give.’ Agastya 
was able to give the right answer and he and the kings returned 
with the wealth they needed. Vatapi, as is well known, is the 
name of the fortified city in the western Deccan which was 
the capital of the early Chalukyas; it is now called Badami. 
And if, as seems probable, the abode of the two daitya kings is 
to be sought in this region, this story may be taken to mark 
the beginning of Agastya’s connexion with the South. 

The Mahabharata also records the story of Agastya drinking 
up the waters of the ocean to enable the Devas to dispose of 
their enemies who had taken refuge under the sea, and of his 
journey to the South on some unspecified business — when he 



Agastya' had to be sent to the South to redress the balance 
of’ the earth which had been rudely disturbed by the assemblage 
of all the gods and sages in the North. 

The pact with the Vindhya mountains and the drinking 
of the waters of the ocean have been generally accepted as 
allegorical representations of the spread of Aryan culture first 
to India south of the Vindhyas, and then across the seas to 
the islands of the archipelago and to Indo-China — an inter- 
pretation not only intrinsically quite plausible, but supported 
by number of other facts relating to Agastya and his abode. 

In the Ramayana, as they are on their way to Agastya’s asrama, 
Rama tells his brother Lakshmana how Agastya, intent upon 
the good of the world, overpowered a deadly demon and 
thereby rendered the earth habitable. He goes on to narrate 
the story of the death of Vatapi in a form which differs from 
that of the Mahabhdrata in some ways, though the deviations are 
of no significance. What deserves particular notice is the 
idea that the Dandakaranya was first made fit for human (Aryan) 
occupation by the success of Agastya against the asuras. 
Agastya’s conflict with the asuras and rakshasas is also hinted 
at elsewhere in the Ramayana. The sage ViSvamitra, for 
instance, explains to Rama the reason for Tataka’s depredations 
against Aryan settlers. Agastya had destroyed Tataka’s husband 
Sunda, and was consequently attacked by Tataka and her son 
Marica. Agastya cursed them both, turning Marica into 
a rakshasa and his mother into an ugly ogress. From that 
time to the moment when Rama did away with her, she 
maintained a war of revenge. 

‘It is very clear,’ observes a modern student of the Agastya 
legends, ‘that the stories of Agastya were based on historical 
memories. Agastya is typical of the early fighters among the 
Aryans in the South of India. In the Deccan, he is even 
now one of the most famous of holy men and is considered 
the oldest teacher of ancient times. A later age has transformed 
this first apostle of Aryan culture into a tapasvin and a holy 


THE DAWN OF HISTORY 


man, a hard fighter and a keen hunter, who triumphed in the 
midst of barbarous enemies. And the same Agastya, the 
famous hunter and archer, whom, like Hercules, none could 
approach in eating and drinking and whose inner essence 
is yet traceable behind the distortions of old sagas, was a holy 
man somewhat of the brand of Friar Tuck in Jvanhoe.’ 

The site of Agastya’s asrama has been located in many places 
from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin, as well as outside India 
— in the Malaya mountains, the southernmost section of the 
Western Ghats, being perhaps the most famous. This multipli- 
city of Agastya asramas and bhavanas has been taken to imply 
either that he is a purely mythical figure or that a whole clan 
of Agastyas spread to all the places mentioned, though it is 
admitted that there is nothing to show when or how the 
clan arose. It seems better to suppose that round the one 
historical Agastya, the author of the Vedic hymns and husband 
of Lopamudra, who played an important role in his time in 
furthering the aryanization of the South, there naturally 
gathered in course of time a number of stories representing the 
further stages of the movement he started. 

One of the latest accretions to the cycle is the following 
story which, in some versions of the Ramayana, Agastya 
himself narrates to Rama. The great forest of Dandaka had 
become unfit for human habitation because Bhargava had 
cursed it. From the foot of the Vindhyas to the far South, 
the land remained a howling wilderness for a thousand yojanas. 
Agastya, however, happening to go there from the white peaks 
of the Himalayas, caused rain to fall, restoring fertility to the 
soil, and making it a fit dwelling-place for several groups of 
Aryan sages ( rishis ). 

This narrative is not found in any early manuscript of the 
Ramayana and is not annotated by any of the commentators. 
It is obviously a late and clumsy invention. Its account of 
Agastya’s reclamation of desert land and its reference to 
Bhargava’s curse nevertheless seem to bring it into some 
relation with the following legend of Parasurama’s creation of 
the Kerala country, which is also of relatively recent origin 
and finds no place in the genuine purarias. 

Parasurama slew his mother Renuka at the command of his 
father Jamadagni, and had to expiate this sin by undertaking 




in relation to the creation of Konkan, the coastal strip in the 
north of Kerala. 

A rough idea of the process and results of the aryanization 
of the South may be formed by a study of the linguistic map 
of India as it is today, always remembering that difference in 
language is by no means indicative of difference in race, but only 
in culture. The languages of Northern India and Maharashtra 
in the Deccan are clearly dialects of Sanskrit, or some idiom 
closely akin to it, formed in the process of its being spoken by 
different classes of people whose original language it was not. 
Sounds and words unknown to Sanskrit are found in consider- 


able numbers in these popular dialects, and they are doubtless 
derived from the original languages of the pre-Aryan inhabitants 
which, in general, were killed by the speech of the more 
masterful incoming culture. But while this was the course of 
events in Northern India and the western Deccan, it was quite 
different on the eastern coast and farther south. Here too 









THE DAWN OF HISTORY 71 

accept local customs and incorporate them as part of the new 
composite social order they evolved, and to find more or less 
suitable places in their elastic pantheon for the many godlings 
and goddesses cherished by the pre-Aryan peoples. We shall 
never know the exact details of the process; but a study of 
early Tamil literature, the oldest evidence from the southern 
side to which we have access, produces the definite impression 
that the new influences were everywhere welcomed and embraced 
with alacrity, and that the changes were effected peacefully 
and in an orderly manner. This impression may be due to T amil 
literature being relatively late in its development, and by no 
means contemporary with the first Aryan impact on the South — 
the product, perhaps, of an age of peace and harmony that 
followed a period of initial struggles. But the little we 
know of the history of Indo-Aryan civilization in the eastern 
colonies renders such a supposition alike unnecessary and 
improbable. Nevertheless, the Ramdyana lays stress on the 
hostility of the rakshasas to the sacrificial religion of the Aryan 
sages, on their repeated incursions into halls of sacrifice where 
they created much confusion and disorder, and on the great 
need that existed for Rama to curb the excesses of these 
inimical folk in order to secure the safety and peace of the 
asramas. If this part of the story has any historical basis (it is 
indeed very doubtful if it has), it would provide some evidence 
of initial opposition to the incoming culture on the part of the 
older inhabitants of the land. 

Tradition makes Agastya the father of Tamil, the author 
of the first grammar of that language, and the royal chaplain 
( kulaguru ) of the divine line of Pandyan rulers, the descendants 
of Siva and Parvati who condescended to become the first king 
and queen of this celebrated line. 

There is no clear and specific reference to Agastya, the sage, 
much less to his exploits, in any of the early Tamil works now 
known — the anthologies of the Sangam Age; once indeed the 
phrase ‘ Sage of Podiyil ’ (Podiyil being the southernmost section 
of the Western Ghats, the Bettigo of Ptolemy) is applied to the 
star Canopus — an indication that the legends relating to Agastya 
were not unknown in the Tamil land at the time. His miracu- 
lous birth and his relation to Vasishtha were known to the 
author of the poem Manimekalai. The same work also says that 



SOUTH INDIA 



of the three Sangams narrated in the Ircdyanar Agapporul 
Urai, a work of the eighth or ninth century AJ>. Here Agastya 
is counted as a member of the first and second Sangams which 
lasted for 4,440 years and 3,700 years respectively. His work 
Agattiyam is said to have been the grammar ( nul ) for the first 
Sangam, while that work together with the Tolkappiyam and 
three other works formed the nul for the second Sangam. 

Whether Agastya wrote a treatise on Tamil grammar, and if 
so in what relation that work stood to the Tolkappiyam, the 
oldest extant work on the subject, has been discussed by 





THE DAWN OF HISTORY 


Tolkappiyan was a disciple of Agastya was too strong for them 
to deny, so they postulated hostility between teacher and pupil 
arising out of Agastya’s jealousy and hot temper. Naccinark- 
kiniyar records the story that after his migration to the South, 
Agastya sent his pupil Trinadhumagni (Tolkappiyan) to fetch 
his wife Lopamudra from the North. Agastya prescribed that 
a certain distance should be maintained between the pupil and 
the lady during their journey, but when the rising of the Vaigai 
threatened to drown Lopamudra, Tolkappiyan approached too 
close in holding out to her a bamboo pole with the aid of which 
she reached the shore in safety. Agastya cursed them for 
violating his instructions saying that they would never enter 
heaven; to which Tolkappiyan replied with a similar curse on 
his master. This silly legend represents the last phase of a 
controversy, longstanding, significant, and by no means near 
its end even in our own time. 

The affirmation and denial of Agastya’s fathership of Tamil 
and of his work being the source of the Tolkappiyam are both 
symbolic of an attitude to the incoming northern Sanskritic 
influences. As a matter of fact there is no mention of Agastya 
either in the Tolkappiyam or in the preface to it by Panam- 
baranar. The earliest reference to the Agattiyam occurs only 
in the eighth or ninth century A.D., as we have seen, and that is 
also the time when the Pandyan charters begin to proclaim 
the preceptorship of Agastya to the Pandyas, the patrons of 
Tamil literature and the Sangam, and the first genuine Tamil 
power to achieve political expansion and establish an empire in 
the full light of history. Almost all the stories meant to 
support Agastya’s connexion with Tamil and Tolkappiyan must 
have been elaborated in subsequent ages; but the attempt to 
give Agastya the dominant position in the evolution of Tamil 
culture evoked a challenge. Things went on smoothly so long 
as Aryan influence, the influence of the ‘Northern’ speech and 
culture, was content to penetrate the Tamil land quietly and by 
imperceptible stages, and effect a silent transformation of the 
native elements. This process began very early and was 
accepted by the Tamils to an extent that has rendered it all but 
impossible to differentiate the elements that have gone to make 
up the composite culture. But when a theory was put forward, 
that is when a legend was invented to show that Tamil as a 



towards the South, and that consequently the chief line of 
communication must have lain along the eastern coast. But 
the Aryan expansion started from the north-west and proceeded 
towards the east and south. The eastern parts of North India 
came under Aryan influences at a relatively late period, and 
even then were not as completely aryanized as the western half. 
Though Kalinga is indeed mentioned by Panini, it still appears 
extremely unlikely that the main route of Aryan advance to the 
South lay along the east coast. The evidence of the Brahmanas, 
of the Ramayana and of the Buddhist canon indicates clearly 
that the barrier of the Vindhyas was negotiated at convenient 
points and that the chief routes lay right across them, the 
Narmada and the Satpuras. Vidarbha is one of the earliest 
kingdoms to be mentioned and no one has sought to locate any 
place connected with Rama’s exile anywhere to the east of 
Nagpur, while many would locate them all in the western 
Deccan, Nasik and its neighbourhood having the best claims. 
The route taken by the pupils of Bavari from Aimaka to 
Magadha must have been the reverse of the usual Aryan route 
through the Avanti 
whence it crossed 




THE DAWN OF HISTORY 75 

of South Indian Brahmins, Brihaccarana, ‘the great migration’, 
preserves the memory of a great movement towards the South; 
and if this view is correct, the fact that a section of this group, 
the Malanadu, is further subdivided into the Kandra-Manikkam, 
Mangudi and Satya-mangalam — all names of villages along the 
Western Ghats — may be taken to indicate that the immigrants 
hugged the line of the adjacent highlands and peopled the skirts 
of Mysore and the Coimbatore and Madura districts before 
they spread elsewhere. But all this is too speculative, and there 
is no direct evidence worth the name. Other routes than across 
the Vindhyas might have been followed; there is, for example, 
the sea-route from the mouths of the Indus to Gujarat and the 
north Bombay coast; or, at a relatively later date, the eastern 
route by Kalinga. Ceylon, perhaps, was aryanized by im- 
migrants who followed the sea-route from North India, as 
evidenced by their language, Sinhalese, which is Indo-Aryan. 

During the long period of seven or eight centuries when 
South India was being progressively aryanized and a new 
culture was being evolved, the ancient maritime contacts of the 
country with the lands to the west and east were still maintain- 
ed, the tangible evidence of which, literary and archaeological, 
deserves the following brief notice. 

The queen of Sheba visited Solomon at Jerusalem ‘with 
a very great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much 
gold, and precious stones’. Again, the navy of Hiram ‘that 
brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty 
of almug trees, and precious stones’. King Solomon made 
‘a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the best gold’. 
Lastly, ‘the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy 
of Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, 
bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks’. Hiram 
was the Phoenician king of Tyre and Solomon’s alliance with 
him was an essential .element in the prosperity of Jerusalem 
in his time. Hiram used Solomon’s kingdom as a high road 
to the Red Sea where he built shipping which greatly promoted 
trade and led to an accumulation of great wealth in Jerusalem. 
Ophir may well be the Abhira country, and its twin Tharshish 
may also be sought there. The peacocks and sandalwood 
(almug) Solomon obtained are both South Indian in name 
as well as in origin. Though silver was not an Indian product 


76 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

some of the ivory might have been, especially as the Hebrew, 
Egyptian and Greek names for the elephant are derived ulti- 
mately from the Sanskrit ibha. Ebony was another Indian 
article conveyed to Palestine in this period by the merchants 
of Dedan on the south shore of the Persian Gulf. The Assyrian 
and Babylonian empires traded with India by sea from their 
ports on the Persian Gulf and continued to receive gold, spices 
and fragrant woods from India. It has been pointed out 
rightly that ‘rice, peacocks, sandalwood, every unknown article 
which we find imported by sea into Babylon before the fifth 
century B.c., brought with it a Dravidian, not a Sanskrit, 
designation’. In the ' seventh century B.c. traders from the 
west introduced into southern China a system of inscribed 
coinage based on a Babylonian standard, and a sea-trade 
between Babylon and China necessarily includes India. A 
beam of Indian cedar found in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar 
(604—562 B.c.), the teak logs found in the temple of the 
Moon-god at Ur at levels belonging to about the same age or 
a little later, and the Baveru Jataka which relates the adventures 
of certain Indian merchants who took the first peacock by sea 
to Babylon, all confirm the existence of active maritime inter- 
course between South India and its western neighbours. In 



THE DAWN OF HISTORY 


seas. Hippalus’ discovery (c. a.d. 45), if it was a fact, must 
have been of value to the Roman and Greek traders of his time. 

In Chinese historical sources occur references to maritime 
traders bringing typical Indian products to China as far back as 
the seventh century B.c. Generally regarded with incredulity, 
these accounts receive striking confirmation by the discovery in 
the Philippines of a number of iron-age finds bearing close 
resemblance to objects found in South India of about the same 
age — the first millennium B.c. These comprise iron imple- 
ments and weapons such as knives, axes, daggers and spear- 
points; glass beads and bangles, both green and blue; and 
finally beads of semi-precious stones such as agate, cornelian, 
amethyst, and rock-crystal. In the earlier iron-age strata only 
green glass, whose colour is due to iron, occurs; in the later, 
a blue glass, whose colour is due to copper, also occurs. ‘Both 
the iron and glass objects are similar to and in some cases 
identical with the prehistoric glass and iron finds in the South 
of India. These occur in the dolmen tombs and in burials 
which are found by the hundreds of thousands, and which 
almost certainly antedate the historic Chera, Chola and Pandyan 
kingdoms, whose history goes back to the beginning of the 
Christian era or before. As finds of similar glass beads and 
bangles have recently been made in the Malay Peninsula, in 
dolmen tombs in Java, and in North Borneo, the inference is 
inescapable that we have clear evidence of a trade contact 
between the northern Philippines and Southern India running 
well back into the first millennium B.c. The extensive trade 
and colonization and later conquests of the South Indian king- 
doms, in Sumatra and Java as well as in Indo-China in the 
early centuries of the Christian era, are of course well known. 
The new material, however, seems to make it clear that this 
was far from being the beginning of such contacts, but rather 
the last stages in an association reaching as far as the northern 
Philippines, which had begun many centuries before.’ 


Library Sri Pratap Cull-a* 
S.,.u, : ur g ’ 







C H A P T E 


THE AGE OF THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 

— inscriptions — Arthaidstra on trade between North and South India — 
Megasthenes on Pandya — Tamil kingdoms in the edicts of As ok a — Satiyaputa 

— ASoka’s empire in the Deccan — confederacy of Tamil states — Mauryan 

I N the fourth century B.C., the empire of Magadha was greatly 
expanded under the powerful, though unpopular, dynasty of 
the Nandas who, according to Puranic accounts, conquered 
all rival monarchs and became sole emperors of the whole of 
India. How far their sway extended into the South, it is by no 
means easy to determine. That it included Kalinga seems to 
be confirmed by the famous Hathlgumpha inscription of 
Kharavela who ruled over Kalinga in the second century B.c. 
This inscription mentions a Nanda raja in connexion with the 
construction of an aqueduct, and states elsewhere that King 
Nanda carried away as trophies of war a statue of Jina and 
other heirlooms of the rulers of Kalinga. Kannada inscriptions 
from Mysore and the Bombay-Karnatak of the tenth and eleventh 
centuries a.d. preserve faint memories of the rule of the 
Nandas in the Kuntala country; but there is little confirmation 
of this tradition. Nander on the upper reaches of the Godavari 
has sometimes been taken to be the survival of an ancient 
name like Nau-Nandadhera and as indicating the extent of 
Nanda power into the Deccan. Indeed, punch-marked puraria 
coins, which are found all over the Deccan, South India, and 
Ceylon as well as in North India, are clear witnesses of ancient 
contacts between the North and South whose details are now 
lost; but while they enable us to infer the existence of trade 
connexions, they are of no avail in fixing the southern limit of 
the Nanda empire. The inclusion of Kuntala in that empire 
conforms to the limits of the Mauryan empire under ASoka as 
determined by the existence of his inscriptions in the South, 
and there is no clear evidence of the Mauryan emperors 
having undertaken wars of conquest in the South. It may, 




from his body. Two inscriptions of about A.D. 900 from the 
neighbourhood of Seringapatam describe the summit of the lower 
hill Chandragiri at Sravana Belgola as marked by the footprints 
of both Bhadrabahu and Chandragupta munipali. Later inscrip- 
tions at Sravana Belgola bearing dates in the twelfth and fifteenth 
centuries repeat this tradition with variations. Similar attestation 




THE AGE OF THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 81 

also comes from literary sources, of which the earliest seems to 
be the Brihatkathakosa of Harishena (a.d. 931). The absence 
of any clear evidence about the actual end of Chandragupta 
Maurya lends some plausibility to this legend; but it is im- 
probable in itself, and the identity of the Chandragupta muni 
of the inscriptions is by no means beyond doubt. 

The Arthasastra of Kautilya gives some information of value 
about the trade between the North and the South in the age 
of the early Mauryan empire. ‘Among land routes,’ says 
Kautilya, ‘my teacher considers that leading to the Himalaya 
superior to the one leading to Dakshinapatha, because of the 
elephants, horses, spices, ivory, hides, silver and gold articles, 
all very valuable (to be had there).’ He then expounds his 
own quite different view as follows: ‘No,’ says Kautilya. 
‘Although it is deficient in woollen cloth, hides and horses, the 
Dakshinapatha abounds in conch-shells, diamonds, precious 
stones of other kinds, pearls, and articles of gold. Moreover, the 
southern trade route across Dakshinapatha traverses a territory 
rich in mines and valuable merchandise, is frequented by many 
(traders) and easy to travel by. That is the superior route.’ This 
passage almost brings before our eyes the large-scale opening-up 
of trade with the South which the foundation of the Nanda and 
Mauryan empires brought about. The view represented by 
Kautilya’s teacher {dcharya) was becoming rapidly out of date 
as a result of new conditions, and the pupil affirms that there 
were in his day more wealth and larger possibilities of trade 
in the South than ever before. The mention of gold, diamonds 
and other precious stones and pearls, and of the easy conditions 
of travel along the much frequented routes, deserves to be 
particularly noted. Again, in his account of the articles that 
entered the royal treasury, Kautilya includes varieties of pearls 
from the Tambrapami river in the Pandyan country, from 
Pandyakavata (which is explained in the commentary as the 
Malayakoti mountain in the same area), and from the Churna 
river in Kerala. He also mentions fine cotton fabrics from 
Madura, as well as vaidurya (beryl) of various colours, and 
varieties of sandalwood which must also have come from 
South India. 

The legendary account given by Megasthenes of the rule of 
the Pandyan kingdom by Pandaia, a daughter of Herakles, has 



kind calculated 
the daily consu 





the identity of the Satiyaputa with the Kosar and their country 
with Kongu. The Satputes among modem Marathas may be 
descendants of emigrants to Maharashtra from the South. 

The conquest of Kalinga by ASoka (c. 260 B.c.) is one of the 
best-known events of his reign and formed the turning-point in 
his spiritual career. No wonder his edicts are found in Dhauli 
in the delta of the Mahanadi, and at Jaugada in the Ganjam 






THE AGE OF THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 85 

placed under mahamatras, some assisting viceroys, others in 
charge of districts and others dispensing justice in the cities. 
Antamaliamatras were charged with defence and missionary 
work among backward peoples. 

The characters of the Asokan inscriptions in Mysore, 
Hyderabad and Kurnool vary in several respects from those of 
the Northern edicts and have been recognized as a special 
Southern variety of the Brahmi script. This shows that 
writing must have been in use in the South for some time 
before to allow of such variations being developed, or at least 
that the Southern edicts were engraved by southerners who 
understood the language and were the equals of their North 
Indian contemporaries in their culture and outlook. 

Inscriptions on stone relic caskets found in the stupa at 
Bhattiprolu near the mouth of the Krishna river are probably 
only a few decades later than Anoka's edicts; they are engraved 
in the same southern variety of the Brahmi script, and their 
language obviously reflects many peculiarities of local speech. 
These inscriptions mention a king Kubiraka and his father 
whose name is lost. 

The famous Hathigumpha inscription of Kharavela (first 
half of the second century b.c.) mentions a league of Tamil 
states that was 113 years old at the date of the inscription and 
had been for some time a source of danger to the Kalinga 
kmgdom. This shows that the different states of the Tamil 
country were, even at that early age, capable of entering into 
enduring diplomatic relations and pursuing a steady policy 
towards neighbouring states, near and far. 

The poet Mamulanar, whose reference to the hoarded wealth 
of the Nandas has been cited above, says that the Ko&r 
started operations against their foes and gained successes 
against many of them; but as the chief of Mohur did not 
submit, the Moriyar, who had a large army of which the 
war-like Vadugar formed the vanguard, sent an expedition 
to the South to assist them. Mamulanar wrote about four 
centuries later than the fall of the Mauryan empire, and if 
his expression ‘vamba moriyar’ is taken to refer to the 
newly-risen Moriyas, the dispatch of assistance to the Ko£ar to 
help them in their conquests must have occurred when the 
Mauryan empire was still strong and powerful. This active 




THE AGE OF THE MAURYAN EMPIRE 87 
premature to formulate final conclusions on this matter. New 
caves and inscriptions are still being discovered, such as the 
inscribed natural cave at Malakonda in the Nellore district. 
And tradition is strong, as we have seen, that Jainism came 
into South India about the same time as Buddhism, if not 
earlier. It is not possible to assert that these monuments owe 
their origin exclusively to Buddhists or Jains; it is probable that 
some may be attributed to the one and some to the other. 

Though the script of these inscriptions is Brahmi of the 
Southern variety, the language employed in many of them is 
Tamil in its formative stages. The writing was alphabetic, and 
already included signs for peculiarly Dravidian sounds like r, /, 
1 and n. Other notable features are that vocalic consonants 
were represented by two symbols, first the sign of the consonant 
and then the complete vowel sign. These developments (and 
others not detailed here) must have resulted from a process of 
trial and error extending perhaps over several generations. 

The exact contents of these inscriptions still remain obscure, 
but a few facts emerge from tentative studies of them. We 
can say, for instance, that among the donors of monuments 
were a husbandman (kutumbika) of Ceylon (Ila), besides 
a woman, merchants (vanikar), and members of the ICarani 
caste. These brief inscriptions are thus seen to bear testimony 
to the support commanded from all classes of the laity by the 
ascetics who pursued their spiritual life in the solitudes of 
mountains and forests. Yet it seems easy to exaggerate their 
social and religious significance; there is no evidence that 
the Tamil people in general had accepted Jainism or Buddhism 
in this early period; and the evidence from the literature of 
the succeeding age, that of the Sangam, shows the Vedic religion 
of sacrifice and some forms of popular Hinduism entrenched 
in the affections of the people and their rulers. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

K. Gopalachari: Early History of the Andhra Country (Madras, 1941) 
G. Jouveau-Dubreuil: Ancient History of the Deccan (Pondicherry, 1920) 
Proceedings of the Third AU-India Oriental Conference (1924), pp. 275 ff. 
B. L. Rice: Mysore and Coorg from Inscriptions (London, 1909) 

R. Sharma Sastri (ed.): ArthaSdslra of Kauplya (Mysore, 1909) 

P. T. Srinivas Iyengar: History of the Tamils (Madras, 1929) 




THE SATAVAHANAS & THEIR SUCCESSORS 


Duration^ and area of Satavahana rule — Satavahanas and Andhras — rise 

Successors of the Satavahanas — Abhiras — Churns — Ikshvakus and their 

3 "The Salankayanas — Matharas of Kalinga — Vishnukundins — kings of 
the Ananda gotra. 

The Vakatakas of Berar — the Kadambas of Banavasi — the Gangas of 

In the Deccan, the Mauryan empire was followed by the rule of 
the Satavahanas, which lasted for four and a half centuries 
from about 230 B.C. At its greatest extent the Satavahana 
empire covered the whole of the Deccan and spread far into 
Northern India, perhaps even as far as Magadha. Its collapse 
followed ultimately upon long wars against the Sakas of Gujarat 
in the first and second centuries A.D. By the beginning of the 
third century the empire had virtually disappeared, giving place 
to a number of minor independent dynasties. 

The dynasty (kula) of the Satavahanas is doubtless identical 
with the Andhras or Andhrabhrityas in the Puranic lists of kings. 
They were called Andhras because they were of Andhra origin 
(jati) and their rule was probably confined to the Andhra 
country at the time the Puranic lists were compiled. The other 
name, Andhrabhrityas (‘Andhra servants’), may imply that the 
ancestors of the royal Satavahanas were employed in the service 
of the Mauryan empire and thus moved into the western Deccan 
where they set up an independent state when that empire 
declined after Aioka. Pliny mentions the Andhra territory in 
the eastern Deccan as including thirty walled towns, besides 
numerous villages, and as maintaining an army of 100,000 in- 
fantry, 2,000 cavalry, and 1,000 elephants. Though the Puranas 
list thirty kings of the dynasty ruling all together over 460 years, it 
is very difficult, in the present state of our knowledge, to narrate 





THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 89 
their history in a connected form. The names of the earliest 
kings in the Puranic list figure also in inscriptions and on coins 
found in the western Deccan at Nasik, Karle and Naneghat. 
There is no trace of these early monarchs in the Andhra country 
on the east coast. Again, Kharavela of Kalinga states clearly 
that the territory of the Satavahana king Satakarni lay to the 
west of his kingdom. From these facts we may conclude that 
the Satavahanas rose to power in the western Deccan, in the 
region round about Paithan (Pratishthana) traditionally associated 
with them, and thence spread their empire in all directions. In 
the first instance they conquered north and south Maharashtra, 
eastern and western Malwa, and what is now Madhya Pradesh. 
In this task they were helped by the Rathikas and Bhojas who 
were duly rewarded with offices, titles and matrimonial 
alliances. 

The exact date of the foundation of Satavahana power cannot 
be determined, but the Puranic lists suggest that the first king, 
Simuka, probably began to reign about 230 B.c. This suggestion 
is confirmed by the script of the Nasik inscription of the second 
king Kanha (Krishna) which has been assigned by Biihler to ‘the 
times of the last Mauryas or the earliest Sungas, in the beginning 
of the second century B.c.’ According to Jain accounts Simuka 
(who ruled for 23 years) grew so wicked towards the end of 
his reign that he was dethroned and killed. He was succeeded 
by his brother Kanha (207—189 B.c.) who extended his king- 
dom to the west as far as Nasik if not farther. The third king 
was Sri Satakarni I, whose figure was sculptured in rilievo at 
Naneghat along with the figures of his father Simuka, his 
queen Naganika, a Maharathi, and three princes. He conquered 
western Malwa, and an inscription of his queen records his 
performance of certain great sacrifices and the fees paid to the 
officiating priests, including tens of thousands of cows, thou- 
sands of horses, numbers of elephants, whole villages and huge 
sums of money (tens of thousands of karshapanas). Twice it 
appears that Satakarni proclaimed his suzerainty by performing 
the horse-sacrifice, and the victory thus celebrated must have 
been at the expense of the Sungas, the imperial power of the 
North. In the drama Malavikagnimitra, Kalidasa mentions a 
victory of the Sungas over the Andhras, which was doubtless 
an episode in the struggle which ended with the final victory of 



Deccan was 
Satakami II 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 91 
history of the Andhras. But it is certain that the Saka power 
in the west was finally destroyed by the Gupta ruler Chandra- 
gupta II (a.d. 380-414), also a Vikramaditya, and that legend 
has failed to distinguish the later Vikramaditya from his earlier 
namesake. 

The four immediate successors of Hala had short reigns 
totalling less than a dozen years all together, an indication of 
a troubled time. About the same time the ‘western satraps’ 
(Sakas) came into prominence. Bhumaka is the earliest of 
them, and Nahapana the greatest conqueror. His rule extended 
over Gujarat, Kathiawar, northern Maharashtra, Konkan, and 
even parts of southern Maharashtra for a time. The Periplus 
states that the kingdom of Mambanus (Nahapana) began with 
Ariake (Aryaka of Varahamihira), and that the Greek ships 
coming into the Satavahana port of Kalyan were diverted to 
Barygaza (Broach). Nahapana’s capital was Minnagara, perhaps 
Dohad, half-way between Ujjain and Broach. The expansion 
of Saka power at the expense of the Satavahanas probably 
occurred in the period A.D. 40—80, about the time of the 
Periplus. 

Under Gautamlputra Satakarni (c. A.D. 80-104), the Sata- 
vahana power revived. He is described as the destroyer of the 
Sakas, Pahlavas and Yavanas. He overthrew Nahapana and 
restruck large numbers of his silver coins. From the Sakas he 
recovered northern Maharashtra and the Konkan, the Narmada 
valley and Saurashtra, besides Malwa and western Rajputana. 
His empire extended to Vidarbha (Berar) and to Banavasi in the 
south. There is no evidence of his rule in Andhradega, though 
it may have touched Kalinga. His achievements are recorded 
in glowing terms by his mother, GautamI BalaSri, in an 
inscription at Nasik engraved after his death in the nineteenth 
year of his son and successor Pulumayi II. This shows 
that the Sakas did not regain their lost possessions for some 
time. Coins of Pulumayi II who reigned for at least 24 years 
have been found in the Godavari and Guntur districts and on 
the Coromandel coast as far south as Cuddalore. His pre- 
occupations in the east gave the Sakas an opportunity to regain 
some of their lost territory in western Rajputana and Malwa 
(c. A.D. 126-31). In an effort to stay this reconquest Pulumayi’s 
successor, a Satakarni, married the daughter of Mahakshatrapa 



HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


Rudradaman. But this Saka king defeated the next Satavahana 
ruler twice in ‘fair fight’ and took from him Aparanta (north 
Konkan) and Anupa (the Narmada valley). 

Perhaps the best known Satavahana ruler is Sri Yajna 
Satakarni (c. a.d. 170-99). He must have renewed the struggle 
with the Sakas and recovered some of the provinces lost by 




THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 93 
who struck coins in their own names; Mahabhojas and Maharathis 
who were confined to a few families in the western Deccan — the 
latter being connected with the Satavahanas by marriage; 
and relatively late in the history of the empire was created the 
office of mahasenapati which continued under later dynasties. 
Some mahasenapatis were in charge of outlying provinces 
while others controlled departments at the centre. The state 
was divided into aharas (administrative divisions) each under a 
minister ( amatya ). Below these came the villages, each with its 
own headman ( gramika ). Other officials named in the inscrip- 
tions are treasurers and stewards, goldsmiths and coiners, 
administrators ( mahamdtras ), record keepers, ushers, and am- 
bassadors. 

In society new sub-castes were forming on an occupational 
basis, such as shepherds (golikas) and ploughmen ( halikas ). 
More interesting is the total assimilation of foreigners, Sakas and 
Yavanas, either as Buddhists or as degraded Kshatriyas, many 
of them bearing such thoroughly Indian names as Dharmadeva, 
Rishabhadatta and Agnivarman. The Saka Rishabhadatta, we 
read, made a pilgrimage to Pushkara on the river Barnasa and 
presented cows and villages to Brahmins; but we do not hear of 
foreigners following Hindu practices in the western Deccan 
after the second century A.D. Gautamlputra, who is said to have 
destroyed the Sakas, Yavanas and Pahlavas, was evidently 
thorough in his work. Though nothing is said of the Yavanas 
in the eastern Deccan, it is certain that Graeco-Roman 

influences had a great share in fashioning the stupas at 

Amaravatl and other places in the Krishna valley, and 

Greek (yonaka) lamps are mentioned in an inscription from 

That women were prominent in social life and held property 
in their own right is seen from records of their lavish charity 
mentioned in inscriptions. In sculptures we see them worship- 
ping Buddhist emblems, taking part in assemblies and 

entertaining guests alongside of their husbands. Men vied 
with women in the scantiness of their dress and in the profusion 
of their ornaments. Even the cottage had its share of 
such comparative luxuries as jugs, jars, chairs, tables, 
stools, beds and other household furnishings of attractive 




In the inscriptions of the time appear the names of a number 
of sects as well as of monks of various grades of learning and 
eminence engaged in enlightening the faithful in the Law of 
the Master. Stupas, the sacred tree, the footprints of the 
Master, the trisula emblem, the dharmachakra , relics and statues 
of the Buddha and other great teachers and of the Nagarajas 
were all objects of worship. The sculptures of this time show 
men and women in states of ecstatic devotion rather than 
merely kneeling or perhaps prostrating themselves with joined 
hands before the objects of their devotion. 

Brahminism also flourished and most of the Satavahana 
rulers were devoted to it. The third king of the line per- 
formed a number of Vedic sacrifices and even named one of 
his sons VedisrI. Hala’s Saptasati opens with a passage in 
adoration of Siva. Gautamiputra Satakarni was a great 
supporter of the Brahmins and tried to emulate the epic heroes 
Rama, Kesava and Arjuna. The pantheon of Hinduism in this 
period included Indra, Vasudeva, the sun and the moon, Siva, 
Vishnu, Krishna, Ganesa and Pasupati. Temples to Gauri are 
mentioned in the Saptasati as also the mrata of fire and water. 

After its fall, the Satavahana empire was partitioned among 
the Abhlras in the north-west, the Chutus in the South and 
the Ikshvakus in Andhradesa. In Madhya Pradesh, descen- 
dents of the Satavahanas themselves continued to rule and the 
Pallavas rose to power in the south-east. Thus was broken the 
political unity of the Deccan which had lasted for about six 
centuries from the time of the Nandas. 

The Abhlras were certainly foreigners and are mentioned 
in the Mahabhashya. In the second century A.D., they figure 
as generals under the Saka satraps of western India. The 
Puranas state that ten Abhlras succeeded the Satavahanas and 
ruled for 67 years. An inscription from Nasik speaks of king 
Madhariputa Isvarasena, the Abhlra, and a son of Sivadatta. 
The record has much in common with Satavahana inscriptions, 
including the manner of its dating. Isvarasena was perhaps 
the founder of the dynasty about which nothing more is known 
than that in A.D. 249-50 it originated an era called Kalachuri 
or Chedi in later times. 

As little is known of the Chutus who ruled in Maharashtra 
and Kuntala. The names of certain kings of the line are 


96 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

known from coins found in the North Kanara district of 
Bombay and the Chitaldrug district of Mysore, and from 
inscriptions in Kanheri, Banavasi and Malavalli. Lead coins 
with the horse device and inscribed with the name Hariti (a 
part of the name of the Chutus) have come from the Anantapur 
and Cuddapah districts. Some historians consider the Chutus 
to be a branch of the Satavahanas, while others postulate 
a Naga origin for them. They were supplanted by the 
Kadambas. 

The Ikshvakus ruled over the Krishna-Guntur region. The 
Puranas call them Sriparvatiyas — rulers of Sriparvata and 
Andhrabhrityas (‘Servants of the Andhras’). Though seven 
kings are said to have ruled for 57 years in all, only a few are 
known by name from inscriptions. Originally they were 
feudatories of the Satavahanas and bore the title mahatalavara. 
Vasithiputa Siri Chantamula, the founder of the line, performed 
the asvamedha and vajapeya sacrifices. The reign of his son 
Virapurisadata formed a glorious epoch in the history of 
Buddhism and in diplomatic relations. He took a queen 
from the Saka family of Ujjain and gave his daughter in marriage 
to a Chutu prince. Almost all the royal ladies were Buddhists: 
an aunt of Virapurisadata built a big stupa at Nagarjunikonda 
for the relics of the great teacher, besides apsidal temples, 
viharas and mandapas. Her example was followed by other 
women of the royal family and by women generally as we 
know from a reference to one Bodhisiri, a woman citizen. 
The last known member of the line is Ehuvula Chantamula, 





THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 97 
to be employed, patronymics are also mentioned. The slightly 
later Kadamba practice of bearing matronymics and the 
patronymic gotra is in the line of development from Satavahana 
to Pallava practice. Aharas came to be called rdshtras, and the 
title Raja gave place to the more impressive Maharaja. 

In the Andhra country the Ikshvakus were followed by kings 
of the Brihatphalayana gotra , only one of whom — Jayavarman — 
is known by name, from the solitary surviving copper-plate 
grant of the line. His kingdom was divided into aharas, each 
under an executive officer, vapatam ( vyaprita ). This grant 
may be said to start the series of brahmadeyas, or gifts to 
Brahmins, which increase in number and importance through 
the centuries and confirm the decline of both Buddhism 
and Jainism. 

The Pallavas, in the south-east of the former Satavahana 
empire, made Kanchipuram their capital. A foreign, Pahlava, 
origin has often been postulated for them, but on a broad view 
they appear— like the Kadambas and even the Chutus before 
them— to have been a dynasty of North Indian origin which 
moved to the South and there adapted local traditions to their 
own use. Thus Satakarni of the Chutu dynasty, ruler of 
Banavasi, worshipped at and endowed the shrine of the god of 
Malavalli, and the Kadamba king who succeeded him did 
likewise. A little later the Kadamba line began to declare its 
devotion to the kadamba tree and to Svami Mahasena (i.e. 
Subrahmanya) whom Tamil tradition regarded as dwelling in 
the kadamba tree. In the same manner, Pallava, as the name of 
the dynasty of Kanchipuram, must be taken to be the Prakrit- 
Sanskrit rendering of tondai, the name of the land and its 
rulers as well as of a creeper. 

Pallava history opens with three copper-plate grants, all in 
Prakrit and all dating from the time of Skandavarman, the 
earliest when he was yuvaraja, the others after he had become 
king. He belonged to the Bharadvaja gotra , performed the 
agnishtoma, vajapeya and aivamedha sacrifices and bore the title 
‘Supreme King of Kings devoted to dharma’ . In his time 
Kanchipuram was the capital and his kingdom extended up to 
the Krishna in the north and the Arabian Sea in the west. The 
steps by which this empire was built up cannot now be traced. 
A ninth-century tradition affirms that Vlrakurcha, an early 





THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 


on the equivalent of the 25th of August 458 in the twenty- 
second year of Simhavarman’s reign. This date receives 
confirmation from the Ganga charters and enables us to 
construct the following genealogical table for the Pallavas. 

Kumaravishnu I (325-50) 

I 

Skandavarman (350-75) 

I 

Viravarman (375-400) 

I 

Skandavarman II (400-36) 

I 

I I i 

Simhavarman I Yuvamaharaja Kumaravishnu I 

(436-60) Vishnugopavarman I j 

Skandavarman III Simhavarman II Buddhavarman 

(460-80) (480-500) j 

Nandivarman Vishnugopavarman II Kumaravishnu III 

The charters on which this table is based only record grants, 
so that the political history of the Pallavas from 325-500 
is almost a blank. All we can deduce, therefore, is that 
Vishnugopa, the opponent of Samudragupta, was a contemporary 
and perhaps brother of Kumaravishnu I, while Yuvamaharaja 
Vishnugopavarman I probably did not live to reign as king, and 
Simhavarman II must have had a very prosperous reign as he 
is known to have issued a large number of grants; but what 
happened after his death is by no means clear. Simhavarman, 
the father of Simhavishnu, who started the best-known line of 
Pallava rulers towards the end of the sixth century A.D., finds 
no place in this genealogy and thus leaves another gap in the 
line of succession which cannot be bridged. 

We can say, however, that the Pallava administrative system 
made a further advance at this time. The king adopted the 
additional title of bhattaraka, the heir-apparent had a recognized 
position, as yuvamaharaja, and the other princes continued to 
be employed on state affairs. Different classes of district 
officers are listed, though the exact nature of their functions is 



\ HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


not known. There is evidence of strong military and 
organizations and labour may have been conscripted by 
The manufacture of salt, and sometimes of sugar, was a 
monopoly, and villages were expected to maintain the 
officers free of charge when they were on tour. On the 
hand, exemption of taxation was allowed on all gifts of la 
Brahmins who were held, in theory at any rate, to be entit 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 101 
with Pishtapura and Avaraukta as capitals; Devarashtra (i.e. 
Elamanchili) in the Vizagapatam district, and kingdoms with 
Palakka and Kusthalapura as capitals. We have little definite 
knowledge of the political position of these Southern states or 
of their relations with one another. 

Hastivarman was succeeded by his son Nandivarman I (c. 375). 
His kingdom included the vishaya of Kudrahara on both sides 
of the Krishna river. The part that lay to the south was 
subsequently conquered by the Pallavas who named it Vengi- 
rashtra. Nandivarman I was followed on the throne by his 
son Hastivarman II; then came Skandavarman son of Hasti- 
varman II; Skanda was followed by Chandavarman, the second 
son of Nandivarman I, and the latter by his son Nandivarman II 
(c. 430), the last known king of the line. 

Like the Pallavas the Salankayanas had the bull crest, but 
there is little else to show definitely that the two dynasties 
were closely related or that on that account the Salankayanas 
were left unmolested by their more powerful neighbours in the 
South. The Salankayana administrative system had much in 
common with that of the contemporary Pallavas. The village 
headman was called mutuda, or alderman, a title that does not 
occur elsewhere. The tutelary deity of the dynasty was the 
sun god and they worshipped Siva or Vishnu in addition. 
Their charters bear a close resemblance in their script to the 
earliest inscriptions of the Hindu colonies of Indo-China and 
Malaysia, and there is good reason to hold that the Telugu 
country took a prominent part in the movement of coloniz- 

In Kalinga the period following Samudragupta’s invasion is 
taken up by the rule of a line of kings who belonged to the 
Mathara kula. Seven kings bearing names ending with varman 
are known, from their copper-plate grants, although their 
genealogy is not forthcoming. Pishtapura, Simhapura, and 
Vardhamanapura are among the places from which grants were 
issued. Though some of the kings used matronymics and 
adopted the antique Satavahana mode of dating their records, 
in other respects they clearly mark a transition to the records 
of a later time. The language of the inscriptions is Sanskrit 
and the kings called themselves Kalingadhipatis and Parama- 
mahesvaras. Roughly, the period of their rule extended 



Madhavavarman I (440-60) 


I 

I 

1 Vikramendravarman I (460-80) 

I 

i an Indrabhaftaraka (480-S I S) 

I 

Vikramendra II (515-35) 

I 

Govindavarman (535-56) 

I 

Madhavavarman II (556-616) 

I 

Manchana-bhattaraka 

lan I is reputed to have performed elev 
countless agnishtomas, but we need not ta 







THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 103 
neighbourhood at the time of the invasion of the eastern 
Deccan, at the beginning of the seventh century, by the Chalukya 
ruler of Badami, Pulakesin II. 

Between the kingdom of the Vishnukundins in the north 
and that of the Pallavas in the south there rose, early in the 
sixth century, a small kingdom ruled by kings of the Ananda 
gotra. The first of the line was Kandara who gave his 
daughter in marriage to a Pallava prince and who, after sharp 
battles with the Vishnukundins on the banks of the Krishna, 
wrested from them the title ‘Lord of Trikutaparvata’. His 
kingdom was nevertheless small, probably comprising no more 
than the modern taluks of Guntur and Tenali. Other kings 
of the line were Damodaravarman, whose father performed 
many sacrifices, Attivarman and Kandara’s grandson whose 
name is not known but who has left at Chezarla a stone 
inscription which may be assigned to the last quarter of the 
sixth century. The capital of the kingdom, Kandarapura, is 
mentioned in inscriptions and must have been founded by 
King Kandara. The kings of this house were generally 
Saivites, though Damodaravarman was a Buddhist; and what- 
ever their own predilections may have been they patronized all 
sects impartially. 

The Vakatakas of Madhya Pradesh held an important place 
in the politics and culture of the land in the fourth and fifth 
centuries a.d. They had notable diplomatic and matrimonial 
relationships with all the great contemporary royal families like 
the imperial Guptas, the Vishnukundins and the Kadambas. 
They made substantial additions to the famous gallery of cave 
temples and paintings at Ajanta. 

The name of the Vakatakas has been connected by some 
historians with the little village of Bagat in Bundelkhand, while 
others are inclined to treat it as of Andhra origin. They rose 
to power at a time when the last of the Satavahanas had ceased 
to rule in Madhya Pradesh and the Saka satraps had exhaust- 
ed themselves by their long struggles with the Satavahanas. 
The Puranas mention VindhyaSakti as their founder and Purika 
in ‘Berar’ as their early capital, and also testify to the expansion 
of their power north of the Vindhyas as far as Vidtea. This 
rise of the Vakatakas may be placed in the last quarter of 
the third century a.d. 






THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 105 


revised by Kalidasa, describing the most famous exploits of 
Rama. He also founded a new capital at Pravarapura to which 
he moved in the second half of his reign. The crown prince, 
Narendrasena, married a Kadamba princess — the daughter of 
Kakusthavarman. 

Narendrasena (445-65) was beset by difficulties at the begin- 
ning of his reign. The Nala king Bhavadattavarman ruling in 
‘Bastar state’ invaded the Vakataka kingdom and for a time his 
victory seemed to be complete. Narendrasena, however, soon 
recovered his strength and turned the tables on the enemy, 
even though his grand-uncle Kumaragupta was in no position 
to help him on account of the danger to his own empire from 
the Hunas. Malwa, Mekala and Kosala also passed under the 
rule of Narendrasena for a time. His son, Prithvlshena II, the 
last known king of the main line, had to retrieve the fortunes 
of his family twice. His opponents were very probably the 
Nalas and, possibly, the TraikQtakas of southern Gujarat. 

The history of the collateral Basim branch may now be briefly 
noticed. Sarvasena was succeeded by his son Vindhyasena or 
Vindya^akti who conquered southern Maharashtra with the aid 
of Prithvlshena I of the main line. His son was Pravarasena II 
who, after a reign of fifteen years, left on the throne a minor 
son of eight who had a long and peaceful reign. His son 
Devasena (c. 460-80) was a pleasure-seeker who left the 
government of the state to a minister named Hastibhoja, and was 
succeeded by his son Harishena (c. 480-515). He was the 
most powerful ruler of the line and succeeded Prithvlshena II 
in the main kingdom as well. His Ajanta record shows that he 
extended his rule over Gujarat, Malwa, southern Kosala and 
the Kuntala provinces, thus extending the boundaries of the 
empire wider even than under Pravarasena I. The fall 
of the Vakatakas occurred between 515 and 550, during 
which period Chhattisgarh was lost to the Somavamsis, southern 
Maharashtra to the Kadambas, northern Maharashtra to the 
Kalachuris, and Malwa and the northern part of Madhya 
Pradesh to Yasodharman. Finally the Chalukyas of Badami 
completed their overthrow (c. 550). 

From the middle of the fourth century, the Kadambas rose 
to power in the south-west Deccan as a result of the Pallavas’ 
Weakened position after Samudragupta’s invasion of the South. 



Mayurasarman (345-60) 
Kangavarmin (360-85) 
BhagiratlJ(385-410) 


Raghu (410-25) Kakusthavarman (425-50) 

Santivarman (450-75) Ku maravarman Krishnavarman I 


MrigeSavarman (470-88) 


Ravivarman Bhanuva 
(500-38) 

Harivarman 

(538-50) 


Mandhatrivarman 

(488-500) | | 

Vishnuvarman Devavarman 

in Sivaratha Simhavarman 


Krishnavarman II (550-65) 


Ajavarman 


Later legend credited Mayuravarman, as he then came to be 
called, with the performance of eighteen horse-sacrifices and the 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 107 
■distribution of many villages among Brahmins, but the early 
inscriptions of the dynasty say nothing about this. Vakataka 
Rudrasena of the Basim branch is slid to have conquered 
Kuntala, and his invasion was resisted with a fair measure of 
success by Kangavarman. VaijayantI (Banavasi) was the capital 
of the Kadambas, and Palasika (Halsi) a secondary capital. 
Kakusthavarman was one of the great rulers of the line. He 
had a prosperous reign and his daughters married into many 
important royal families, including the Guptas. His son 
Santivarman was a ruler of great fame and much personal 
charm. He is said to have worn three crowns and 'attracted 
to himself the prosperity of his enemies’. During his reign 
danger threatened from the Pallavas; and the situation was met 
by transferring control in the southern districts to his younger 
brother, Krishnavarman. This amounted to a virtual division 
of the kingdom, as is seen from the latter’s performance 
of a horse-sacrifice — never undertaken by a subordinate 
ruler. The war with the Pallavas cost Krishnavarman his 
life, besides ruining the principality of the Kekayas, the home- 
land of his queen. His son Vishnuvarman had to accept 
investiture from the Pallavas. The Pallava rulers concerned 
were Nanakkasa and Santivara, names otherwise unknown. 
VTrigesavarman, the son and successor of Santivarman, fought 
successful wars against the G ingas and Pallavas. Besides 
being an expert rider of horses and elephants, he was a scholar 
who built and endowed liberally a Jain temple in Palasika to 
the memory of his father. 

Ravivarman killed Vishnuvarman and other kings in battle, 
and occupied Palasika after driving out Chandadanda, ‘Lord of 
Kanchi’, a title which here seems to mean only 'a Pallava’ and 
not necessarily ‘ruler ot Kanchi’. Most probably Chandadanda 
belonged to the sa ne branch of the Pallavas as Santivara who 
anointed Vishnuvarman. The successes of Ravivarman restored 
the original uniiy and extent of tne <adamba kingdom. 

His successor was Harivarman (5 18-50). He was a man of 
peace in who e reign the Kadambas lost the northern half of 
their empire, anl Pulakefin I established the Chalukya power 
in 545 by erecting a strong hill fortress in Badami. The 
Kadambas were by no means a strong or united power, and 
the feud between the elder and the younger branches was 



10S A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

revived by Krishnavarman II who actually undertook an 
expedition against VaijayantI which put an end to the reign of 
Harivarman, the last known ruler of the elder branch. Either 
Krishnavarman II himself or his son Ajavarraan must have 
been ruling Banavasi at the time of its conquest by the 
Chalukya Kirtivarman, son of Pulakesin I. 

In between the territory of the Kadambas in the west and 



though later tradition first locates it at Kuvalala, modem 
Kolar, and afterwards at Talakkad, nearer the hostile frontier 
of the Kadambas against whom, in company with the Pallavas, 
he waged war at this date. 

Konganivarma’s son and successor was Mahadhiraja Madhava 
I ( c 425). He was a clever politician to whom later tradition 
attributes the authorship of a commentary on the Dattakasutra, 
a treatise on erotics. The next ruler was his son Ayyavarman 
(c. 45.'). a great warrior who was also proficient in the sastras, 
itihasas and Puranas. He was anointed by the Pallava Simha- 
varman I of Kanchl, possibly because he sought support from 






THE SATAVAHANAS AND THEIR SUCCESSORS 109 
to have continued under their sons and successors Madhava II, 
alias Simhavarman, and another Simhavarman. The former was 
anointed by Pallava Skandavarma and married a sister of 
Kaaamba Krishnavarman I. According to later grants, Avinlta, 
the child of this union, was anointed successor to the throne 
while still a baby (c. 500). The genealogy of the Gangas may 
then be represented as follows: 

Konkanivarman (400) 

I 

Madhava I (425) 

! 


Ayyavarman (450) Krishnavarman (450) 


Madhava II, Simhavarman Viravarman 

alias Simhavarman (475) (475) yuvaraja 

Avinita (500) 

The social, administrative and religious conditions that 
prevailed in the Kadamba and Ganga kingdoms were very 
much the same as those in the contemporary Pallava kingdom. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

K. Gopaiachari: Early History of the Andhra Country (Madras, 1941) 
G. Jouvbau-Dubreuii.: Ancient History of the Deccan (Pondicherry, 1920) 
K. A. N. Sastri: The New History of the Indian People, Vol. VI, ch xii, 
‘South India’ (Lahore, 1946) 

D. C. Sircar: Successors of the Satavahanas (Calcutta, 1939) 




THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 111 
At the end of each poem are notes giving the name of its author, 
the occasion of its composition and other details. These notes, 
probably the work of the editors, must be taken generally to re- 
present a correct tradition though there are difficulties about 

The Tolkappiyam, a comprehensive work on Tamil grammar, 
is also of the same age. 

Doubtless what has survived is only a part of the much vaster 
literature of these remote times. An inscription of the early 
tenth century a.d. mentions among the achievements of the early 
Pandyas the translation of the Mahabharata into Tamil and the 
establishment of a Sangam at Madura. This translation has 
been lost, though poems composed by ‘Perundevanar who sang 
the Bharatam’ form the invocations placed at the beginning of 
six out of the eight anthologies named above. Parts of a Tamil 
Bharatam by a Perundevanar have come down to us, but the author 
was a contemporary of Nandivarman III Pallava (ninth century 
A.Di) and clearly different from his namesake of the Sangam age. 

That a college (Sangam) of Tamil poets flourished for a time 
under royal patronage in Madura may well be a fact. But the 
earliest account of it, which occurs in the introduction to the com- 
mentary on the Iraniyanar Agapporul (c. A.D. 750), is enveloped 
in legend. It refers to three Sangams which lasted, at long 
intervals, for 9,990 years all together and counted 8,598 poets 
(including a few gods of the Saiva persuasion) as members, and 
197 Pandyan kings as patrons. Some of the names of the kings 
and poets — such as Kadungon and Ugrapperuvaludi — are found 
in inscriptions and other authentic records, showing that some 
facts have got mixed up with much fiction, so that no conclusions 
of value can be based on it. 

A careful study of the synchronisms between the kings, 
chieftains and poets suggested by the notes at the end of the poems 
indicates that this body of literature reflects occurrences within 
a period of four or five continuous generations at the most, say a 
period of 120 or 150 years. It is only for the Chera line of rulers 
that we can construct anything like a continuous genealogy, and 
this shows the existence of two lines of rulers, either connected by 
marriage or otherwise, each extending over three or four genera- 
tions at the most. In all other instances we only have unrelated 
names which render a regular history of the period impossible. 



112 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

We must therefore rest content with the outstanding figures and 

their achievements reported by the poets. 

The land was divided among the three ‘crowned kings’ of the 
Chera, Chola and Pandya lines, and a number of minor chieftains 
who according to the political conditions of the time either owned 
allegiance to or fought for one or other of these monarchs, or else 
led an independent existence. Seven of these chieftains gained 
particular recognition from the poets for their liberal patronage 




captive several Yavana traders whom for some time he subjected 
to harsh treatment, for reasons that are not clear, but subsequently 
released after obtaining a heavy ransom. He is said to have 
fought many wars and spent many years in camp with his armies. 
He won victories against seven crowned kings, and thus reached 
the superior rank of an adhirajar. He was called Imayavaram- 
ban — ‘He who had the Himalaya for his boundary’ — a title 
explained by the claim that he conquered all India and carved the 
Chera emblem of the bow on the face of the great mountain — 
an instance of poetic exaggeration not uncommon in these poems. 
His capital is called Marandai. He fought a war with the con- 
temporary Chola king in which both the monarchs lost their 
lives and their queens perfomed sati. 

8 




114 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

Adan’s younger brother was ‘Kuttuvan of many elephants' 
who conquered Kongu and apparently extended the Chera 
er from the western to the eastern sea for a time. Adan 
two sons by different queens. One of them was known as 
Chera with the kalangay festoon and the fibre crown’; the 



THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 115 
of Pattini, the Divine Chaste Wife, was obtained after a fight 
with an Aryan chieftain and bathed in the Ganges before being 
brought to the Chera country. All these events are narrated 
with numerous embellishments and in epic detail in the Silappadi- 
kdram , though whether this poem derives from the epilogue to 
the decad, or the epilogue from the epic, is more than we can say. 
The antiquity and popularity of the story of Kannagi and Kovalan 
and the probable existence of other and earlier versions of the 
Kannagi saga which preceded the Silappadikaram are fairly well 
attested, and it is not unlikely that Senguttuvan took the lead in 
organizing the cult of Pattini, and was supported in his effort 
by the contemporary rulers of the Pandya and Chola countries 
and of Ceylon as the Silappadikaram says. 

All together five monarchs of the line of Udiyanjeral belonging 
to three generations are mentioned in the Padirruppattu. The 
number of years they are said to have ruled totals 201, while 
another three monarchs of the collateral line are said to have 
reigned for a further 58 years in all. Their reigns surely cannot 
have been successive, and we must therefore postulate a very con- 
siderable degree of overlapping. The Chera kingdom must have 
been a sort of family estate in which all the grown-up males had 
a share and interest — what Kautilya falls a ku/a-sangha , a family 
group, and considers a very efficient form of state organization. 
A similar clan-rule might also have prevailed in the Chola and 
Pandya kingdoms in this period. Such an assumption for the Cholas 
would be the best means of explaining Senguttuvan’s interference 
in a war of succession in which nine Chola princes lost their 
lives ; it would also furnish a natural explanation for the occurrence 
in the Sangam poems of so many royal names, all to be accommo- 
dated within four or five generations. 

The heroes of the last three decads of the ‘Ten Tens’ and 
their ancestors must be taken to have ruled contemporaneously 
with the kings of the house of Udiyanjeral. The first to be heard 
of among them are Anduvan and his son Selvakkadungo Vali 
Adan, both praised by the poets in general terms for their valour 
and liberality; the father is said to have been a well-read scholar 
and the son performed many Vedic sacrifices. Famous among 
the minor chieftains who were their contemporaries were Ay 
and Pari, both celebrated in several poems by a number of poets. 
Ay was the patron of a brahmin poet from Uraiyur, and Pari 






THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 117 
thin when his hillock was closely invested by the three crowned 
kings of the Tamil land. Kapilar’s intelligence went far to aid 
Pan’s heroism in prolonging the resistance; for instance, several 
other poets say that Kapilar trained a large number of birds 
(parrots according to one) to fly out from Pari’s beleaguered 
fortress into the open country behind the enemy’s lines and bring 
in com to feed the city and the army for several months! But 
the inevitable end came, and in a short poem Pari’s two daughters 
thus bewailed the occurrence: ‘In those days we enjoyed the 
moonlight happily with father, and our enemies could not take 
our hill. Now, this day, in this bright moonlight, kings with 
victorious war-drums have captured the hill, and we have lost 
our father.’ The reference to the victorious drum is ironical 
as Pari was not killed in open fight but by treachery. 

After Pari’s death Kapilar took charge of his two unmarried 
daughters and tried without success to get them suitably married. 
Of what happened subsequently there are different accounts. 
A note at the end of one of the poems in the Purananuru records 
that Kapilar, after the death of Pari, left his daughters in the 
charge of brahmins and committed suicide by starvation. The 
tradition recorded in a Chola inscription of the eleventh century, 
however, is very different; it mentions only one daughter whom 
Kapilar had given in marriage to the Malaiyaman before the former 
entered the fire to attain heaven. And there exist many songs 
by Kapilar on Malaiyaman Tirumudik-Kari of MuHiir, the excel- 
lence and easy defensibility of his country', and his liberal patronage 
of poets and minstrels. Kapilar also states that Kari killed in 
battle another chieftain called Ori and transferred his mountain, 
Kollimalai, to the Cheras. 

Whatever may be the truth about the marriage of Pari’s 
daughter or daughters, it is certain that Kapilar neither committed 
suicide by starvation nor by entering fire soon after the death of 
his friend and patron. In fact, he repaired to the court of the 
Chera prince Selvakkadungo Vali Adan, the son of Anduvan, 
because he was reputed to possess all the great qualities of Pari. 
Kapilar celebrated Adan in song and was sumptuously rewarded 
for his effort. 

Adan’s son was Perunjeral Irumporai (c. 190 ) renowned for 
his overthrow of the stronghold of Tagadur (Dharmapuri in Salem 
district), the seat of the power of the Adigaiman chieftains. He 



118 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

is also said to have subjugated a rebellious shepherd leader named 
Kaluvul and captured his fortress. He was learned, performed 
many sacrifices and begat heroic sons worthy of succeeding him. 
His wise and righteous conduct was such as to induce his purohit 
to renounce the things of the world and retire to a life of asceticism. 

Adigaiman, also called Neduman Anji, the opponent of 
Irumporai and lord of Tagadur, was one of the ‘seven patrons 
and the supporter of the celebrated poetess Auvaiyar who has 
left many songs about him and some about his son Poguttelim. 
Evidently patron and poetess did not get on start well at first, 
for one poem gives expression to Auvaiyar’s vexation at having 
waited a long time for a present. Soon, however, a perfect 
understanding grew up between them; the poetess is all praise for 
the hero and his achievements in the field, and undertakes a 
diplomatic mission to the Tondaiman on his account. On his 
side Anji showed his devotion by many valuable presents including 
a rare myrobalan fruit believed to prevent the ailments of old age 
and to assure longevity. According to Auvaiyar, Adigaiman was 
born of a family which honoured the gods by puja and by sacrifices, 
which introduced into the world the sweet sugar-cane from heaven, 
and ruled the world with great ability for a very long time. 
Adigaiman fought with success against seven opposing princes and 
destroyed amongst other rebellious strongholds that of Kovalur. 
The Chera invasion of Tagadur, however, is not mentioned by 
Auvai in her poems, evidently because she did not like to advert 
to the misfortunes that befell her patron; the event formed the 
theme of a poem of later times, the Tagadur Yattirai, now known 
only from quotation in other works. Adigaiman was aided by 
the Pandya and Chola monarchs against the Chera, but their help 
made no difference to the result. The war led to Adigaiman’s 
acknowledgement of the suzerainty of the Chera on whose behalf 
he subsequently led an expedition against Pali, the capital of 
Nannan, where, after inflicting great losses on Narman’s forces, 
he was killed in battle along with Ay Eyinan, another Chera 
feudatory, by the intrepid general of Nannan, known as Nimili or 
Minili. Auvaiyar laments his death without mentioning its 
occasion, and bewails the desolation of the days that remained 
to her after Adigaiman had earned his title to a hero-stone, a clear 
statement that he fell on the battle-field. 

The last Chera prince mentioned in the extant portions of 


THE AGE OF THE gANGAM AND AFTER 119 
the 'Ten Tens’ is Kudakko Ijanjeral Irumporai (c. a.d. 190), a 
cousin of the victor of Tagadur. He is said to have fought a 
battle against ‘the two big kings’ (Pandya and Chola) and Vicci, 
to have captured five stone fortresses, to have defeated the big 
Chola who ruled at Potti and the young Palaiyan Maran, and to 
have brought to the ancient city of Vanji much booty from these 
campaigns. 

The mention of the Vani river flowing near the Chera capital 
shows that Karuvur was in fact Vanji. The discovery of numerous 
Roman coins in the neighbourhood, and Ptolemy’s statement 
that the inland city of Korura was the Chera capital, also point 
to the same conclusion. The location of Vanji has been much 
debated in recent years however, and some historians hold strongly, 
though with few tangible reasons, to the view that it is to besought 
on the west coast at Tiruvanjaikkalam in Travancore-Cochin 
State. 

Another Chera prince deserving mention is ‘Sey of the elephant 
look’ who had also the title Mandaranjeral Irumporai (c. A.D. 210). 
After one battle, he was captured by his Pandya contemporary 
Nedunjeliyan, victor of Talaiyalanganam, but regained his free- 
dom in time to prevent his enemies at home from deposing him. 

Among the Cholas, Karikala (c. A.D. 190) stands out pre- 
eminent. He is described in a poem as the descendant of a 
(nameless) king who compelled the wind to serve his purposes when 
he sailed his ships on the wide ocean — possibly a reference to the 
early maritime enterprise of the Cholas. Karikala’s father was the 
son of Ijanjetcenni ‘of many beautiful chariots’, a brave king and 
a hard fighter. Karikala means ‘the man with the charred leg’, 
a reference to an accident by fire which befell the prince early 
in life. Other explanations for the name were invented in later 
times, however, and it has also been taken to be a compound 
word in Sanskrit meaning either ‘death to Kali’ or ‘death to 
(enemy) elephants’. Early in life he was deposed and imprisoned. 
The plucky way in which he escaped and re-established himself 
on the throne is well portrayed by the author of Pattinappalai , a 
long poem on the Chola capital Kaveri-pattinam in the Pattuppattu 
(‘Ten Idylls’). One of his early achievements was the victory 
in a great battle at Venni, modem Kovil Venni, 15 miles to the 
east of Tanjore. This battle is referred to in many poems by 
different authors. Eleven rulers, velir and kings, lost their 



120 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

drums in the field; the Pandya and the Chera lost their glory, 
and the latter sustained the last disgrace that could befall a warrior 
— a wound on his back and from a sense of profound shame he 
sat facing north, sword in hand, and starved himself to death. 
Venni thus marked a turning point in the career of Karikala; 
his victory meant the breaking-up of a widespread confederacy 
that had been formed against him. Another important battle 
he fought was at Vahaipparandalai, ‘the field of vahai trees’, 
where nine minor enemy chieftains lost their umbrellas and had to 
submit. As a result of his victorious campaigns, says the poet 
of Pattinappalai, ‘the numerous Oliyar submitted to him, the 
ancient Aruvalar carried out his behests, the Northerners lost 
splendour, and the Westerners were depressed; conscious of the 
might of his large army ready to shatter the fortress of enemy 
kings, Karikala turned his flushed look of anger against the 
Pandya, whose strength gave way; the line of low herdsmen was 
brought to an end, and the family of Irungovel was uprooted.’ 
The Aruva|ar were the people of Aruvanad, the lower valley of 
the Pennar, just north of the Kaveri delta. Karikala is said to 
have prevented the migration of people from his land to other 



THE AGE OF THE SANG AM AND AFTER 121 
of Tirumangai Alvar for the heroism of its warriors. More 
open to suspicion is the story in the Silappadikaram about a 
supposed daughter of Karikala’s, named Adi Mandi, and her 
husband, a Chera prince called Attan Atti. Earlier poems which 
mention their names and some of the incidents attest only the 
relation between Adi Mandi and Atti, but not that between her 
and Karikala, nor the Chera descent of Atti. Both husband 
and wife were, according to the early testimony, professional 
dancers — attan means dancer. 

Tondaiman Ilandirayan, who ruled at Kanchipuram, was a 
contemporary of Karikala and is also celebrated by the poet of 
the Pattinappalai in another poem in the ‘Ten Idylls’. I|andiraiyan 
is said to have been a descendant of Vishnu and belonged to 
the family of Tiraiyar given by the waves of the sea. There 
is no hint anywhere of his being related to Karikala or of 
his political subordination to the Chola power. Nor is it clear 
whether it was to him or to some other member of his line that 
Auvaiyar went as Adigaiman’s ambassador. Ijandiraiyan was 
himself a poet, and there are four extant songs by him, one of 
them on the importance of the personal character of the monarch 
in the promotion of good rule. 

The Pandya king Nedunjeliyan distinguished by the title ‘he 
who won the battle at Talaiyalanganam’ may be taken to have 
ruled about a.d. 210 . This ruler was celebrated by two great 
poets, Mangudi Marudan alias Mangudi Kilar, and Nakkirar 
each contributing a poem on the monarch to the ‘Ten Idylls’ 
(Pattuppattu) besides minor pieces in the Puram and Aham 
collections. 

From the Maduraikkanji of Mangudi Marudan and elsewhere, 
we learn something of three of Nedunjeliyan’s predecessors on the 
Pandyan throne. The first is an almost mythical figure called 
Nediyon (‘the tall one’), whose achievements find a place in the 
‘Sacred Sports’ of Siva at Madura and among the traditions of 
the Pandyas enumerated in the Velvikudi and Sinnamanur plates. 
He is said to have brought the Pahruli river into existence and 
organized the worship of the sea. The next is Palsalai Muduku- 
dumi, doubtless the same as the earliest Pandya king named in 
the Velvikudi grant and about whom there are several poems. 
He is a more life-like figure than Nediyon, and is said to have treated 
conquered territory harshly. He also performed many sacrifices. 



and soon after his accession, he proved himself more than equal 
to a hostile combination of his two neighbouring monarchs and 
five minor chieftains. There exists a simple poem of great force 
and beauty in which the youthful monarch swears an oath of 
heroism and victory in the ensuing fight. Despising his tender 
years and hoping for an easy victory and large booty, his enemies 
invaded the kingdom and penetrated to the heart of it; but, nothing 
daunted, Nedunjeliyan readily took the field, pursued the invading 
forces across his frontier into the Chola country and inflicted a 
crushing defeat on them at Talaiyalanganam, about eight miles 
north-west of Tiruvalur in the Tanjore district. It was in this 
battle that the Chera king ‘Sey of the elephant-look’ was taken 
captive and thrown into a Pandyan prison. By his victory 
Nedunjeliyan not only made himself secure on his ancestral throne, 
but gained a primacy over the entire state system of the Tamil 
country. He also conquered the two divisions (kurram) of 
Milalai and Mutturu from Ewi and a velir chieftain and annexed 
them to his kingdom. The Maduraikkanji contains a full-length 
description of Madura and the Pandyan country under Nedun- 
jeliyan’s rule. The poet gives expression to his wish that 
his patron should spread the benefits of his good rule all 
over India. He makes particular mention of the farmers 
and traders of a place called Muduvellilai (unidentified) as 



THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 123 
Pandya and Chola princes and the poets who mention them and 
their achievements — we must now notice a rather protracted civil 
war in the Chola kingdom mentioned by Kovur Kilar and other 
poets. This war was between NalangiHi (also called Setcenni) 
and Nedungilli. The latter shut himself up at Avur which was 
being besieged by Mavalattan, the younger brother of Nalangilji. 
In one poem Kovur Kijar says that if he claimed to be virtuous, 
Nedungilli should open the gates of the fort, or if he claimed to be 
brave he should come into the open and fight. He did neither, 
but caused untold misery to the people of his beleaguered city by 
shutting himself up in a cowardly manner. Another poem dealing 
with the siege of Uraiyur by NalangiHi himself, once more 
NedungilH being the besieged, is more considerate and impartial; 
it is addressed to both princes and exhorts them to stop the des- 
tructive war, as whoever loses would be a Chola, and a war to 
the finish must necessarily end in the defeat of one party. A third 
poem relates to a somewhat piquant situation. A poet, Ijandattan 
by name, who went into Uraiyur from NalangiHi, was suspected 
by Nedungijli of spying. As he was about to be killed, Kovur 
Kilar interceded with this song on the harmless and upright 
nature of poets and thus saved him. Another poem hints at 
internal dissensions in the royal family at Uraiyur, which induced 
Nalangilli’s soldiers to rush to war in utter disregard of omens. 
Civil war seems, indeed, to have been the bane of the Chola 
kingdom in this age; Senguttuvan, as we have seen, was caUed 
upon to intervene in another war at an earlier time. 

This sketch of the pofitical conditions of the Sangam age may 
be closed with the mention of two other Chola rulers, both 
opponents of the Cheras in war. Ijanjetcenni of Neydalanganal 
captured two fortresses from the Cheras known by the names of 
Seruppali and Pamajur. Senganan, the Chola monarch famed in 
legend for his devotion to Siva, figures as the victor in the battle 
of Por against the Chera Kanaikkal Irumporai. The Chera was 
taken prisoner, asked for drinking water when he was in prison, 
got it rather late, and then, without drinking it, confessed the 
shame of his position in a song. Subsequently, Poygaiyar, a 
friend of the Chera monarch, is said to have secured his release 
from the Chola prison by celebrating the victory of Senganan in 
a poem of forty stanzas — the Kalavali. According to this poem, 
the battle was fought at Kalumalam, near Karuvur, the Chera 






THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 


of chastity, the conception of the threefold debt (rinatraya) 
with which every man is bom, the beliefs that the cakora bird 
feeds only on raindrops, and that raindrops turn into pearls in 
particular circumstances, are instances of other Sanskritic ideas 
taken over bodily into the literature of the Sangam period. The 
Tolkappiyam is said to have been modelled on the Sanskrit 
grammar of the Aindra school. 

The Tolkappiyam states definitely that marriage as a sacrament 
attended with ritual was established in the Tamil country by the 
Aryas. It is well known that the earliest Dharmasastras mention 
eight forms of marriage as part of the Aryan code — itself the result 
of a blend between Aryan and pre-Aryan forms that prevailed 
in the North; these eight forms are mentioned in the Tolkappiyam 
and other works, and much ingenuity is spent in accommodating 
them to Tamil forms. The Tamils had a relatively simple 
conception of marriage; they recognized the natural coming 
together of man and woman, and the natural differences in the mani- 
festations of love, possibly due ultimately to differences in the 
physical conditions of the different parts of the country. These 
they designated as the five tinais. They had also names for un- 
ilateral love, kaikkilai and improper love, perundinai. Into this 
framework an attempt was made to squeeze the eight Aryan forms 
with results by no means happy. Such difficulties of synthesis 
apart, the most tangible result of the meeting of the Tamil and the 
Aryan was the tremendous richness and fecundity that was 
imparted to the Tamil idiom thereby and the rise of a beautiful 
literature which combined classic grace with vernacular energy and 
strength. This literature of the Sangam, the earliest stratum of 
Tamil literature now available, is also in many ways the best. 

The land was fertile and there was plenty of grain, meat and 
fish; the Chera country was noted for its buffaloes, jack-fruit, 
pepper and turmeric. In the Chola country, watered by the 
Kaveri, it was said that the space in which an elephant could lie 
down produced enough to feed seven, and a veli of land yielded a 
round thousand kalams of paddy. The little principality of Pari 
abounded in forest produce like ‘bamboo-rice’, jack-fruit, valli- 
root and honey. Many rural activities like the cultivation of ragi 
and sugar-cane, the making of sugar from the cane, and the 
harvesting and drying of grain are described in the Sangam 
poems in a vivid and realistic manner. 




THE AGE OF THEvSANGAM ,ANP AFTER 1 27 
proud of their kings and loyal; to fftem, As the people took the 
king for their model, it was his duty to set up a high moral standard 
by his personal conduct; in many poems he was exhorted to keep a 
strict mastery over his passions in order to rule successfully. 
He was to be libera] in his patronage of religion, arts and letters. 
He was to show paternal care for his subjects and to be impartial 
as among different sections of them. He held a daily durbar 
(i ndlavai ) at which he heard and set right all complaints. The 
onerous character of the royal task is emphasized by a poet who 
compares a king to a strong bull which drags a cart laden with 
salt from the plains to the uplands; another affirms that the king, 
much more than rice or water, is the life of the people. To 
brahmins was assigned an important role in the state ; they were the 
foremost among those ( surram ) on whose assistance the king 
relied in his daily work ; and the highest praise of a monarch was 
to say that he did nothing which pained the brahmins. Agricul- 
ture was the mainstay of polity and the basis of war; and a good 
king was believed to be able to command the course of the seasons. 
The ideal of the ‘conquering king’ ( vijigishu ) was accepted and 
acted on. Victory against seven kings meant a superior status, 
which the victor marked by wearing a garland made out of the 
crowns of the seven vanquished rulers. The most powerful 
kings were expected to undertake a digvijaya, which was a con- 
quering expedition in clockwise direction over the whole of India. 
The idea of a chakravarti, ‘wheel-king,’ whose digvijaya was led 
by the march of a mysterious wheel of gold and gems through 
the air is mentioned in one of the poems in the Purananuru. 
Another poem in the same collection mentions the companions of 
a king who committed suicide when the king died — an early 
anticipation of what later became a widespread institution under 
such names as Companions of Honour (Abu Zayd), velaikkarar , 
garudas, sahavasis , apattudavigal and so on. 

The sabha or manram of the king in the capital was the highest 
court of justice. The sons of Malaiyaman were tried and sentenced, 
and later released by the intercessions of Kovur Kilar, in the 
manram of Uraiyur; and Pottiyar, after the death of his friend 
Kopperujolan, could not bear the sight of the same manram bereft 
of him. The elders are said and were doubtless expected to 
have laid aside their personal quarrels when they attended the 
sabha to help in the adjudication of disputes. We may infer 



employed 



THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 129 
the field for signalling and the former to summon soldiers to 
arms. Each ruler and chieftain certainly had a war-drum among 
his insignia. Not only was it carefully guarded, but it was 
bathed periodically and worshipped with loud mantras. The 
occasions for war were numerous, but we need not suppose 
that the refusal of one king to give his daughter in marriage 
to another was as frequent a cause as the poets assert. A 
campaign might be started by the capture of the enemy’s 
cattle, or a brahmin messenger might be sent with a formal 
declaration before hostilities started. The military camp was 
often an elaborate affair, with streets and roads and a separate 
section for the king guarded by armed women, and at which 
the hours of day and night were announced by watchers of water- 
clocks; the gnomon was employed to indicate midday and a 
drum beaten early every morning. Camp fires kept off the cold 
when necessary, and there were towers at important points from 
which a regular watch was maintained against surprises from the 
enemy. Death in battle was welcome to the soldier and even to 
his mother, for it was held to lead him straight to heaven. To 
the warrior, a peaceful death in bed was looked upon as a disgrace, 
and in the families of ruling chieftains the body of a man who died 
otherwise than in war was cut with the sword, and laid on darbha 
grass, and mantras were chanted to secure him a place in the 
warriors’ heaven ( virasvarga ). Soldiers who fell in war were 
commemorated by hero-stones which bore inscriptions detailing 
their names and achievements; these stones were often worship- 
ped as godlings. Wounded soldiers were carefully attended to, 
their wounds being cleaned and stitched where necessary. 

Kings often took the field in person and delighted to rejoice 
with the common soldiers in their successes ; on the other hand, 
if a king was killed or even seriously wounded in the midst of 
the fight, his army gave up the struggle and accepted defeat. 
The vanity of the victor often inflicted deep personal humiliations 
on his vanquished foe, the memory of which rankled and brought 
on further strife. The crowns of defeated kings furnished the 
gold for the anklets of the victor, while a woman’s anklet and a 
garment of leaves were forced on the defeated party who was 
compelled to wear them; his guardian tree was destroyed 
and its trunk converted into a war-drum for the victor. The 
conquered country was at times ruthlessly laid waste, even corn- 
fields not being spared. 9 



the universal preoccupations of the leisured classes, besides 
wine and song and the dance. The king and his enadis with their 
retinues must have formed a gay, boisterous crew at the top of 
society with a boundless capacity for enjoying the pleasures of 
life. 

No occasion was lost for holding a feast and the poets are 
most eloquent in their praise of the sumptuous fare to which 
they were so often asked. One poet declares to his patron: 
‘I came to see you that we might eat succulent chops of meat, 
cooled after boiling and soft like the carded cotton of the spin- 
ning-woman, and drink large pots of toddy together.’ Another 
speaks of wine poured into golden goblets by smiling women 
decked with jewels in the court of Karikala. The flesh of animals 
cooked whole, such as pork from a pig which had been kept away 
from its female mate for many days and fattened for the occasion, 
dppam (pudding) soaked in milk, the flesh of tortoises and parti- 
cular kinds of fish are mentioned as delicacies served at such feasts. 
Among drinks particular mention is made of foreign liquor in 
green bottles, munnir (‘triple water’) — a mixture of milk from 
unripe coconut, palm fruit juice and the juice of sugarcane, and 
toddy well matured by being buried underground for a long time 
in bamboo barrels. 






THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 131 
the plainest food. No wonder, perhaps, that some wives preferred 
to die with their husbands and earn fame as satis. The tonsure of 
widows, it may be noted by the way, like the tying of the tali 
at the marriage ceremony, was obviously a pre-Aryan Tamil 
custom taken over and perpetuated into later times. 

Easily the most cultured amusements open to the upper 
classes in those days were poetry, music (particularly singing) 
and dancing, which often went together. The poets were men 
and women drawn from all classes of society; they composed 
verses to suit the immediate occasion, and were often rewarded 
generously for their exertions, as when Karikala is said to have 
given the author of Pattinappalai 1,600,000 gold pieces. Their 
poems, especially the shorter ones, are full of colour and true 
to life. They abound in fine phrases giving compact and eloquent 
expression to the physical and spiritual experiences of the poet. 
Nor do they lack width of range: besides short lyrics, odes and 
religious hymns were known. The metres employed were simple 
and flexible, the more elaborate Sanskrit forms not having come 

Some of the poets were the resident companions and advisers 
of kings and chieftains, while others moved from one court to 
another in search of patronage. The lasting friendships between 
Kapilar and Pari, between Pisir Andaiyar and Kopperunjolan, 
and between Auvaiyar and Adigaiman Anji are among the best 
known instances of life-long attachment between poet and patron. 
Ungenerous princes who delayed their gifts or were niggardly 
sometimes provoked the poets into pillorying their stinginess 
in song. One poet refused to accept a present sent to him by a 
prince who had not granted him the usual interview. Golden 
lotuses and lilies, land, chariots, horses, and cash are enumerated 
among the presents usually given on such occasions. Besides 
general and probably exaggerated statements, such as Karikala’s 
more than princely gift already mentioned, the gift of an elephant 
is mentioned in one instance, though it is not clear what use the 
poet could have for the animal 

The courts were also enlivened by roving bands of musicians 
followed by women who danced to the accompaniment of their 
music, the panar and viraliyar who moved about the country in 
companies carrying with them all sorts of quaint instruments. 
They seem to have been the representatives of primitive tribal 



corny » to amcu yuvciij, “* — . . 

the fingers; some wore on their fingers things meant for the ear; 
others put on their necks jewels meant for the waist; others again 
adorned their waists with ornaments properly worn on the neck; 
in this wise, like the great group of red-faced monkeys which 
shone in the fine jewels (of Sita) that they discovered on the 
ground, on the day when the mighty rakshasa carried off Sita, 
the wife of Rama of the swift chariot, we became the cause of 
endless laughter.’ Literary convention evolved a class of poem, 
the arruppadai (‘setting one on the path’), in which a poet, panan 
or virali told of the gifts he had received from a patron and 
exhorted his friends to visit him. 

The arts of music and dancing were highly developed and 
popular. Musical instruments of various types are described 
and included many kinds of yal (a stringed instrument like the lute) 
and varieties of drums. Karikala is called ‘the master of the seven 


Boys and girls bathed together in tanks and rivers. The dancing- 
girl was often a serious rival to the wife, and the whole plot of 
the celebrated story of Kovalan and Kannagi turns on this rivalry. 
Like Vatsyayana’s Kaniasutra , the Manimekalai, a work of the 
period after the Sangam, indicates that hetaerae underwent a 
regular course of instruction extending over a number of years and 
comprising court dances, popular dances, singing, playing on the 
lute and flute, cookery, perfumery, painting, flower-work and 
many other fine arts. 

The richer classes dwelt in houses of brick and mortar; the 
walls often bore paintings of divine figures and pictures of animal 
life. Royal palaces were surrounded by gardens tastefully laid 
out. Houses and palaces were constructed according to rules 
laid down in the iastra, care being taken to start at an auspicious 
hour carefully determined beforehand. The Nedunalvadai, 
one of the ‘Ten Idylls’, contains a detailed description of the 
women’s apartments in the palace of Nedunjeliyan, their walls 
and pillars and the artistic lamps manufactured by the Yavanas; 
this is followed by an account of the equipment of the bedroom in the 
palace, its ivory bedsteads and superior cushions. High life even 
in those early days was thus no stranger to refined luxuries. The 
wife was highly honoured and was held to be the light of the family. 
The common folk dwelt in humbler structures in the towns and 
villages, while outcastes and forest tribes lived in huts of sorts 
which are also described in the poems. The making of rope- 
charpoys by pulaiyans and the use of animal skins as mats for 
lying on deserve to be noted. The Pattinappalai gives a vivid 
account of the life of the fisherfolk of Puhar, the paradavar , 
including some of their holiday amusements. 

Valuable hints on popular beliefs and customs are scattered 
among the poems. There was much faith in omens and astrology ; 
one song mentions the portents which preceded the death of ‘Sey 
of the elephant look’. A woman with dishevelled hair was a bad 
omen. There were fortune-tellers who plied a busy trade. 
Children were provided with amulets for warding off evil; and 
rites were practised which were supposed to avert the mischief of 
demons (pey), to bring about rain, and produce other desired 
results. The banyan tree was considered to be the abode of 



134 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

gods, while eclipses were held to be the result of snakes eating up 
the sun and the moon. Crows were believed to announce the 
arrival of guests, and particularly the return of the absent husband 
to his lonely wife, and were fed regularly in front of royal palaces, 
as well, perhaps, as in every household. Mass feeding of the 
poor was also known. 

Trade, both inland and foreign, was well organized and briskly 
carried on throughout the period; Tamil poems, classical authors 
and archaeological finds in South India all speak with one voice 
on this subject. The great port-cities were the emporia of foreign 
trade. Big ships, we are told, entered the port of Puhar without 
slacking sail, and poured out on the beach precious merchandise 
brought from overseas. The extensive bazaar of that great city 
was full of tall mansions of many apartments each with doorways, 
wide verandahs and corridors. The family life of the rich mer- 
chants was carried on in the upper floors while the lower ones 
were set apart for business. Besides the flags waving on the masts 
of ships in harbour, various other kinds of flags advertised the 
different kinds of merchandise as well as the fashionable grog- 
shops. Saliyur in the Pandya country and Bandar in Chera are 
counted among the most important ports in the poems. Horses 
were imported by sea into the Pandyan kingdom, and elsewhere. 
The repairing of merchant ships after their voyages is mentioned, 
as also lighthouses. People from different countries gathered in 
the ports, and life in them was truly cosmopolitan. The Yavanas 
sailed their large ships to Mufiri (Cranganore) bearing gold, and 
returned laden with pepper and ‘the rare products of the sea and 
mountain’ which the Chera king gave. So far the evidence of the 

The author of the Periplus (c. a.d. 75) gives the most valuable 
information about this trade between India and the Roman 
Empire. He mentions the ports of Naura (Cannanore), Tyndis 
—the Tondi of the poems, identified with Ponnani — and 
Muziris (Cranganore), and Nelcynda very near Kottayam, as of 
leading importance on the west coast. Muziris abounded in 
ships sent there with cargoes from Arabia and by the Greeks. 
Nelcynda was part of the Pandyan kingdom. Bacare (Porakad) 
was another port on the same coast. On the nature of the 
trade, the words of the author are worth citing: ‘They send large 
ships to these market towns on account of the great quantity 


THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 135 
and bulk of pepper and malabathrum (to be had there). There 
are imported here, in the first place, a great quantity of coins; 
topaz, thin clothing, not much; figured linens, antimony, coral, 
crude glass, copper, tin, lead ; wine, not much, but as much as at 
Barygaza; realgar and orpiment, and wheat enough for the sailors, 
for this is not dealt in by the merchants there. There is exported 
pepper, which is produced in quantity in only one region near 
these markets, a district called Cottonara. Besides this there are 
exported large quantities of fine pearls, ivory, silk cloth, spikenard 
from the Ganges, malabathrum from the places in the interior, 
transparent stones of all kinds (principally beryls of the Coim- 
batore district for which there was a constant demand in Rome), 
diamonds and sapphires, and tortoise shell; that from Chryse 
Island and that taken among the islands along the coast of Dami- 
rica.’ This trade increased in volume after Hippalus, an Egyptian 
pilot, showed the possibility of large ships sailing with the monsoon 
straight across the ocean instead of small vessels hugging the 
coast and exposing themselves to many risks. Other ports of south 
India mentioned by the author in order are: Balita (Varkalai), 
a village by the shore with a fine harbour; Comari, a fine harbour 
and a sacred place of pilgrimage; Colchi (Korkai) where were the 
pearl fisheries of the Pandyan kingdom worked by condemned 
criminals; Camara (Kaveripattinam), Poduca (Pondicherry) and 
Sopatma (Markanam). There were three types of craft used on 
the east coast: ships of the country coasting along the shore; 
other large vessels made of single logs bound together, called 
sangara and those which made the voyage to Chryse and to the 
Ganges which were called Colandia and were very large. He 
mentions Argaru (Uraiyur) as the place to which were sent all 
the pearls gathered on the coast and from which were exported 
muslins called Argaritic. About the ports on the east coast he 
adds: ‘There are imported into these places everything made in 
Damirica, and the greatest part of what is brought at any time from 
Egypt comes here.’ He notes further that a great quantity of 
muslins was made in the region of Masalia (Andhra country), 
and that ivory was a special product of the country further north 
Dosarene (i.e., Da£arna, Orissa). 

The large quantities of gold and silver coins struck by all the 
Roman emperors down to Nero (a.d. 54-68) found in the interior 
of the Tamil land testify to the extent of the trade, the presence 



136 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

of Roman settlers in the Tamil country, and the periods of the 
rise, zenith and decay of this active commerce. Its beginnings 
may be traced to the reign of Augustus if not to an earlier time, 
as a phenomenally large number bearing his stamp (and that of 
Tiberius) have been found. In that reign despite ‘embassies’ 
from the Pandya ruler, this commerce was by no means extensive 
or economically important. Soon, however, it assumed new 
and unexpected proportions and ceased to be a mere trade in 
luxuries. After the death of Nero, the traffic was not so much 
confined to the Tamil land as before but spread more evenly 
along the Indian coasts, and was conducted by barter rather than 
with money — the emperors subsequent to Nero not being so well 
represented in the coin finds. Towards the end of the second 
century a.d. the direct trade between the Egyptian Greeks of the 
Roman empire and India declined, the traffic passing into the hands 
of the Arabians and, still more, the Auxumites of East Africa. A 
new era commenced with the rise of Constantinople in the fourth 
century a.d. Roman coins reappeared in South India, and em- 
bassies were received by Constantine from the people of the 
Maldives and Ceylon among others. Ceylon was becoming 
important in the trade of the Indian ocean at this time. But the 
activities of the Byzantine period bear no comparison with those 
of the earlier age which had drained the Roman empire of much 
of its treasure and evoked protests from the financiers of the empire 
as well as its moralists. The trade of the early Roman empire 
had wide ramifications and was bound up with much exploration 
and colonization on the part of Graeco-Romans and Indians. 
Says Schoff: ‘The numerous migrations from India into Indo- 
China, both before and after the Christian era, give ample ground 
for the belief that the ports of South India and Ceylon were in 
truth, as the Periplus states, the centre of an active trade with the 
Far East, employing larger ships, and in greater number, than 
those coming from Egypt.’ We shall see that when, after a long 
eclipse, the power of the Chola kings revived in the tenth and 
eleventh centuries, the seafaring instincts of the people had not 
deserted them and that, in the favourable conditions then obtain- 
ing, they attempted tasks more venturesome than anything they 
had achieved in the earlier age. 

Internal trade was also brisk; caravans of merchants with carts 
and pack-animals carried their merchandise from place to place 


THE AGE OF THE S AN GAM AND AFTER 137 
and from fair to fair. Salt was an important commodity of trade 
and salt-merchants moved with their families in carts provided with 
spare axles against contingencies. Barter played a large part in all 
transactions ; honey and roots, for example, might be exchanged 
for fish-oil and toddy, and sugar-cane and aval (rice-flakes) for 
venison and arrack, while in Musiri fish was sold for paddy. 
Agriculture was the mainstay of the national economy, and most 
of its operations were carried on by women of the lowest class 
(kadaisiyar) whose status appears to have differed little from that 
of the slave. The bulk of the land was owned by velldlar, the 
agriculturists par excellence, who commanded a high social rank. 
The richer among them did not plough the land themselves, but 
employed labourers to do it. Besides owning land, they held 
official posts in the civil and military administration, and the titles 
vel and arasu in the Chola country and kavidi in the Pandya were 
applied to them. They not only enjoyed the jus connubii with 
royal families, but shared with the king the duties of war and the 
pleasures of the chase and of the table. The poorer velldlar 
did not shun manual labour, but worked on their own small farms, 
as do the peasantry everywhere. Spinning and weaving of cotton, 
and perhaps also of silk, had attained a high degree of perfection. 
Spinning was then, as always, the part-time occupation of women. 
The weaving of complex patterns on cloth and silk is often 
mentioned in literature and, according to the Periplus, Uraiyur 
was a great centre of the cotton trade. The poems mention cotton 
cloth as thin as the slough of the snake or a cloud of steam, so 
finely woven that the eye could not follow the course of the thread. 
Scissors and needles were known and employed in cutting hair 
and in dress-making ; a kind of hair pomade ( tagaram ) is mentioned 
also. 

In the sphere of religion and ethics the influence of Northern 
ideas is most marked. The practice of walking some distance 
to escort a departing guest was observed by Karikala who went 
on foot for a distance of ‘seven steps’ ( saptapadi ) before requesting 
him to mount a chariot drawn by four milk-white steeds. The 
slaughter of a cow, the destruction of a foetus, and the killing of a 
brahmin were accounted heinous offences; though ingratitude, 
according to the established code, was held to be even worse. 

No single method was adopted for the disposal of the dead; 
both cremation and inhumation with or without urns are freely 



138 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

mentioned. A widow offered a rice-ball to her dead husband on 
a bed of grass ( darbha ) and the pulaiyan had a part to play in this 
funeral ritual. Sati was fairly common though by no means 
universal. The heroism and devotion of the sati were doubtless 
applauded by public opinion, but the practice was certainly not 
encouraged, much less enforced. The perfect wife was held to be 
one who, at the death of her husband, entered the burning pyre 
with as little concern as if she were entering cool water for a bath. 

That Vedic religion had struck root in the South must have 
become clear from the references to the costly sacrifices performed 
by the monarchs of the age. Brahmins devoted to their studies 
and religious duties held a high position in society, and a song of 
Avur Mulam Kilar portrays in much detail the life of Vinnandayan, 
a brahmin of the Kaundinya-gotra who lived in Punjarrur in the 
Chola country. The followers of the Veda had often to engage in 
disputations with rival sectaries, and many are the references to 
such disputations proclaimed by the flying of flags and carried 
on with much gesticulation of the hands. The rival sects are 
not named, but they were doubtless Jainism and Buddhism which 
became more prominent in the succeeding age. From all accounts 
Hinduism was the dominant creed in this age. The worship of 
Subramanya (Murugan) and the legendary achievements of that 
deity are often alluded to. Other members of the pantheon were 
Siva, Balarama, Vishnu, Krishna, Ardhanarisvara, and Anantaiayi. 
The details of Vishnu worship with tulasi (basil) and bell are set 
forth in the Padirruppattu, and the custom is mentioned of people 
starving in the temple to invoke the grace of god. Women went 
with their children to offer worship in the temples in the evenings. 
Asceticism was honoured and tridandi (triple staff) ascetics are 
particularly mentioned. The worship of Murugan was of ancient 
origin and embodied some indigenous features like the velanadal , 
an ecstatic dance in his honour. Indra also came in for special 
worship on the occasion of his annual festival held in Puhar. 
The epic poems of the post-Sangam period show that music and 
dancing were intertwined with religious rites from early times, the 
worship of Korravai by the hunters, of Krishna by the shepherdesses 
and of Murugan by the kuravas being the most striking instances 
of this. A temple of Sarasvatl is mentioned in the Manimekalai 
which also alludes to the kapalikas, an austere class of Saiva 
ascetics. Belief in reincarnation, the effects of karma in successive 




THE AGE OF THE SANGAM AND AFTER 139 
births and the power of fate was the common basis of all religion 
in India, and this was generally accepted in the Tamil country 
also. The joyous faith in good living that generally animates the 
poems of the Sangam Age gradually gives peace to the pessimistic 
outlook on life that is, in the last resort, traceable to the emphasis 
laid by Buddhism on the sorrows of life and its doctrine that the 
only way of escape was the repression of the will to live. This 
note of sadness, already noticeable in some poems towards the 
close of the Sangam Age, becomes more pronounced in the setting 
of the Manimekalai which contains a round denunciation of the 
fools who, not meditating upon the ruthlessness of death, spend 
their time in the blind enjoyment of carnal pleasures. 

A long historical night ensues after the close of the Sangam Age. 
We know little of the period of more than three centuries that 
followed. When the curtain rises again towards the close of the 
sixth century a.d. we find that a mysterious and ubiquitous enemy 
of civilization, the evil rulers called Kalabhras, have come and 
upset the established political order which was restored only by 
their defeat at the hands of the Pandyas and Pallavas as well as 
the Chalukyas of Badami. Of the Kalabhras we have as yet no 
definite knowledge; from some Buddhist books we hear of a cer- 
tain Accutavikkanta of the Kalabhrakula during whose reign 
Buddhist monasteries and authors enjoyed much patronage in 
the Chola country. Late literary tradition in Tamil avers that 
he kept in confinement the three Tamil kings — the Chera, Chola 
and Pandya. Some songs about him are quoted by Amitasagara, a 
Jaina grammarian of Tamil of the tenth century A.D. Possibly 
Accuta was himself a Buddhist, and the political revolution which 
the Kalabhras effected was provoked by religious antagonism. 
At any rate the Kalabhras are roundly denounced as evil kings 
(kali-arasar) who uprooted many adhirajas and abrogated brahma- 
deya rights; there was no love lost between these interlopers and 
the people of the lands they overran. The Cholas disappeared 
from the Tamil land almost completely in this debacle, though a 
branch of them can be traced towards the close of the period in 
Rayalaseema — the Telugu-Chodas, whose kingdom is mentioned 
by Yuan Chwang in the seventh century A.D. 

This dark period marked by the ascendancy of Buddhism, 
and probably also of Jainism, was characterized also by great 
literary activity in Tamil. Most of the works grouped under the 



140 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

head ‘ The Eighteen Minor Works' were written during this period 
as also the Silappadikaram, Manimekalai and other works. Many 
of the authors were the votaries of the ‘heretical’ sects. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

K. Gopalachabi : The Early History of the Andhra Country (Madras, 1941). 


CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 


General outline — Chalukyas: Pulakesin I, Kirtivamian I, Mangalesa, 
Pulakesin II and his conquests— Pallavas : Simhavishnu, Mahendravarman 
I — Chalukya-Pallava wars— Narasimhavarman I Pallava, Mahamalla— Death 
of Pulakesin II followed by confusion— Mahamalla’s achievements— Mahen- 
dravarman II and Paramesvaravarman — Pandyas : Katfungon, Maravarman 
Avanisujamani, Sendan, Arikesari Maravarman — Chalukya Vikramaditya II — 
Arab inroads checked— Pallava wars renewed— Narasimhavarman II Rajasimha, 
Paramesvaravarman II, Nandivarman II — Pandya Koccatfaiyan ; Maravarman 
Rajasimha I and his wars against Nandivarman II— Vikramaditya II invades 
Kanchi— Kirtivarman II defeated by Pandya Rajasimha I— fall of Chalukya 
power and rise of Rashtrakuta Dantidurga— Nandivarman II fails in his 
attempt to check Pandyan power— Varaguna I, Srimara Srlvallabha— Dan- 
tivarman— Rashtrakuta Krishnajl, Govinda II, Dhruva, Govinda III and his 
wars with Pandyas — Nripatunga — end of Pandya &rimara’s reign — Rashtrakuta 
Amoghavarsha I — Gangas of Kalinga. 

Polity — general Features — village community: sabha , nagaram — larger 
administration units — provinces and officials — justice — king — succession — 

For a period of 300 years from the middle of the sixth century a.d., 
the history of South India is virtually the story of mutual conflict 
among three powers each seeking constantly to extend its empire 
at the expense of its neighbours. The three powers were the 
Chalukyas of Badami, the Pallavas of Kanchi and the Pandyas 
of Madura. All of them rose into prominence in the sixth 
century; but the Chalukyas quit the stage about a century earlier 
than the two other powers, their place on the political map being 
more or less exactly filled from the middle of the eighth century 
by their successors, the Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta (Malkhed). 
Besides the main house of Badami, the Chalukyas established 
themselves in two other branches, more or less independent of 
the main line: the Chalukyas of Lata, and the Eastern Chalukyas 
of Vengi. Together with the Gangas of Mysore, the Eastern 
Chalukyas took sides in the conflicts of the three kingdoms, 
sometimes with decisive results. The Cholas of the Tamil 
country had practically disappeared except that a line of Telugu 
rulers bearing their name and claiming a traditional connexion 









CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 143 

Badami into a strong fortress in 543-4, and declared his independ- 
ence by performing a horse sacrifice. The new fortress stood on a 
defensible eminence within three miles of the Malaprabha river. 
Among the hills to the east is Mahakuta; five miles farther in the 
same direction and on the river is Pattadakal, and another eight 
miles down the river is Aihole — all witnessing to the age of Chaluk- 
yan ascendency by their temples and inscriptions. Pulakesin’s 
son Klrtivarman I (566-7) expanded the kingdom by wars 
against the Kadambas of Banavasi, the Maury as of Konkan, and 
the Nalas who probably ruled over a fair-sized kingdom in the 
region of Bastar and the Jeypore Agency. The conquest of 
Konkan brought the important port of Goa, then known as 
Revatidvlpa, into the growing empire. At Klrtivarman’s death 
(597-8), his son Pulakesin II was too young to rule, so his uncle 
Mangalesa, Klrtivarman’s brother, held sway as regent. Manga- 
le3a continued the policy of expansion and invaded the territory 
of Kalachuri Buddharaja whose dominion extended over Gujarat, 
Khandesh and Malwa. This campaign was more of the nature 
of a raid, so that, while it brought in much booty, it made but little 
addition of territory. He suppressed a rebellion on the part of the 
Governor of Revatidvlpa (Goa) and re-established Chalukyan 
power in the Konkan. Instead of surrendering the throne when 
Pulake&n II came of age, Mangalesa sought to prolong his rule 
with a view to handing over the kingdom to his own son in due 
course. Pulakesin therefore left the court and by his own martial 
prowess waged war on Mangalesa with the support of loyal 
friends, killed him in battle and proclaimed himself king (609-10). 
This civil war shook the young kingdom of the Chalukyas and 
enemies began to appear on all sides. Pulakesin II soon proved 
himself one of the ablest monarchs of the line. He defeated 
the rebel Appayika in a battle north of the Bhimarathi river and 
received his confederate Govinda into favour when he offered 
submission. He attacked and overthrew the Kadamba capital 
Banavasi, while the Alupas of South Canara and the Gangas of 
Mysore were compelled to acknowledge his suzerainty. The 
Ganga ruler Durvinita gave one of his daughters in marriage to 
Pulakesin, and she became the mother of Vikramaditya I. The 
Mauryas of northern Konkan were once more reduced to sub- 
mission by a successful attack on their capital Puri (on the island 
of Elephanta), the Lakshml of the western ocean. The fame of 





144 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Pulakesm's arms and fear of the growing power of Sri Harsha in 
Northern India induced the Latas, Malavas and Guqaras to 
offer their submission one after another to Pulakesin. The 
northern frontier of the Chalukyan empire was thus extended at 
one bound to the river Mahi. When Harsha sought to invade 
the Deccan, Pulakesin met and heavily defeated him on the banks 
of the Narmada, capturing many elephants — the only check in 
Harsha’s otherwise victorious career. All these achievements 
were in the first three or four years of Pulakesin’s reign. 

PulakeSin then made his younger brother Vishnuvardhana 



CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 


rivalled his own. His forces penetrated far into the Pallava 
territory and were not stopped until they reached Pullalur, only 
fifteen miles north of the Pallava capital. There a pitched battle 
was fought, and although Mahendravarman was able to save his 
capital he lost the northern provinces to his enemy. This was 
the beginning of the long-drawn-out conflict between the 
Chalukyas and the Pallavas. 

After his return (c. 621) Pulakesin sent Vishnuvardhana to 
rule over the Andhra country as viceroy and complete the process 
of conquest, which he did by about 631. Then, with his brother’s 
approval, he founded a dynasty of rulers who held sway in the 
Telugu country for over five centuries thereafter. 

Pulakesin sent an embassy to the Persian court of Khusru II 
in 625-6 and perhaps this courtesy was returned. 

Pulakesin’s ambition prompted him to undertake another 
expedition against the Pallavas in the hope of achieving more 
decisive results. Mahendravarman had quitted the stage and 
his son Narasimhavarman I Mahamalla (630-68) had begun his 
rule. Pulakesin began his campaign by an attack on the Banas 
who were ruling in Rayalaseema as feudatories of the Palla- 
vas. After overrunning their kingdom he invaded the Pallava 
territory proper and once more threatened the capital. But 
Narasimhavarman defeated the Chalukyans in several battles 
including one at Manimangala about 20 miles to the east of Kanchi- 
puram. In these battles Narasimha was ably assisted by a 
Ceylonese prince, Manavarma, whom he afterwards helped to 
gain the throne of Ceylon. Pulakesin’s expedition was thus a 
failure and was soon followed by terrible retribution. Narasimha- 
varman, encouraged by his successes, invaded the Chalukya 
country in force and, rapidly advancing to the capital, Badami, 
made himself master of the city and its fortress. Pulakesin II 
must have fallen fighting, and following upon his death his 
kingdom was threatened with disruption. Narasimha’s occupation 
of the Chalukya capital is attested to by his title Vatapikonda and 
by an inscription engraved on a rock behind the temple of 
Mallikaijunadeva in Badami during the thirteenth year of his 
reign. 

This was indeed a crisis in the history of the Chalukyan 
kingdom. The feudatories of the empire declared their independ- 
ence and even two of Pulakesin’s sons who were ruling as viceroys 



146 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

sought to follow the same course. Another son however, 
Vikxamaditya— aided by his maternal grandfather, the Ganga 
Durvinlta set himself the task of repelling the Pallava invasion 
and restoring the unity of his father’s empire. He compelled 
Narasimhavarman to retire from Badami and defeated his brothers 
and those other feudatories who wanted to divide the empire 
among themselves. He then proclaimed himself king of the 
restored kingdom in 654-5 and rewarded his younger brother, 
Jayasimhavarman, who had stood by him all along, with the 
viceroyalty of Lata or southern Gujarat. 

,The Pallava monarch must have returned to his capital soon 
after 642. Thereafter he sent two naval expeditions to Ceylon 
j to aid Manavarma. Though the second expedition was successful 
! and Manavarma put the rival king to death and captured Anuradha- 
pura, he was later once more driven into exile and he sought refuge 
in the Pallava court — probably after the death of Narasimha- 

o have vanquished the Cholas, 




CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 147 

Chera country and took to himself the title Vanavan. His son 
Arikesari Maravarman (670-700) was a great soldier who fought 
many battles for the extension of Pandya power, some of them 
against his Pallava contemporary. It is very probable that he 
entered into an alliance with the Pallavas’ enemy on the other side, 
namely Chalukya Vikramaditya I. 

That ruler, after rescuing his country from the invasion of 
Narasimhavarman I and consolidating his power, turned to the 
task of avenging the fate of his father. Hostilities began even in 
the reign of Mahendravarman II, who sustained defeat somewhere 
in the Mysore country; and early in the reign of Paramesvara- 
varman, Vikramaditya advanced to the neighbourhood of 
Kanchipuram, so that Paramesvaravarman had to seek refuge in 
flight. Vikramaditya marched to the banks of the Kaveri and 
encamped at Uraiyur where he probably effected a junction with , 
his ally — the Pandya king. From his exile Paramesvaravarman ^ I 
gathered a large army and offered battle at Vilande to Bhuvikrama, 
the Ganga ally of Vikramaditya. The battle went against him 
and he lost to his enemy a valued crown jewel, the necklace 
which contained the gem ‘Ugrodaya’. Nothing daunted, he 
managed to send a counter-expedition into the Chalukya king- 
dom in order to divert the attention of his enemy. He then 
met the invading forces in battle at Peruvalanallur, two miles 
north-west of Uraiyur, and inflicted a decisive defeat on them. 
The expeditionary force returned with a lot of booty after 
encounters with Vinayaditya and Vijayaditya, the son and 
grandson of Vikramaditya, who had to leave the Pallava territory 
and retire to his own kingdom. 

There was a lull in the conflict between the Chalukyas and 
Pallavas during the generally peaceful and prosperous reign of 
Vikramaditya’s son, Vinayaditya (681-96). Vinayaditya led an 
expedition into Northern India, in which his son Vijayaditya 
greatly distinguished himself, but that is all. Vijayaditya’s 
was the longest reign (696-733) of the Badami period and perhaps 
also the most prosperous and peaceful. It was marked by great 
activity in temple-building. He was followed by his son 
Vikramaditya II (733-44) in the first years of whose reign 
the Arabs who had established themselves in Sind and con- 
quered the neighbouring lands made a push into the Deccan, 
but were stopped effectively by Pulakehn, a son of that 




CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 149 

monarch waged aggressive wars against his neighbours and extended 
the Pandya power into the Kongu country. He also suppressed a 
revolt of the mountain chieftain Ay who occupied the hilly country 
between Tinnevelly and Travancore. His reign ended about 
730, and his son Maravarman Rajasimha I succeeded him. 
Early in his reign Rajasimha espoused the cause of Citramaya, and 
after inflicting a number of defeats on Nandivarman Pallavamafla 
besieged him in a place called Nandigrama, i.e., Nandivaram in 
Chingleput district. The able Pallava general Udayacandra, 
who encountered the Pandya forces in many battles, raised the 
siege of Nandigrama, beheaded Citramaya, and thus made the 
Pallava throne secure for his monarch. . He also dealt with other 
enemies of Pallavamafla like the Sahara king Udayana and the 
Nishada chieftain Prithivivyaghra who were probably acting in 
collusion with the Chalukya Vikramaditya II. The invasion of 
Vikramaditya (c. 740), in which his Ganga feudatory Sripurusha 
co-operated, was indeed the greatest danger that threatened the 
kingdom of Pallavamafla in the early years of his long reign. 
But Vikramaditya behaved on the whole very considerately; 
though he defeated Nandivarman and occupied his capital for 
a time, he did no damage to the city, pleased the people by his 
liberal gifts and returned to the Kailasanatha and all other temples 
the heaps of gold that belonged to them. After recording these 
transactions in a Kannada inscription engraved on a pillar in 
Kailasanatha and thus wiping out the disgrace that had befallen 
the Chalukyas by the occupation of Badami by Narasimhavarman 
I, Vikramaditya withdrew to his own country leaving the Pallava 
ruler to resume charge of his kingdom. Towards the end of his 
reign Vikramaditya sent out another expedition against the Pallava 
under his son Kirtivarman, who carried out a successful raid and 
returned with many elephants and much gold and jewellery captur- 
ed from the enemy. 

Vikramadity a’s reign was also marked by the construction of new 
temples, an activity which was continued by his son Kirtivarman 
II who succeeded him in 744-5. Kirtivarman II and his Ganga 
feudatory Sripurusha came into conflict with the Pandya ruler 
Maravarman Rajasimha I who was extending the Pandya power 
over the Kongu country and beyond. Rajasimha crossed the 
Kaveri and subjugated Malakongam on the borderland between 
the Trichinopoly and Tanjore districts, defeated the Chalukya 



150 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

ruler and his feudatory in a big battle at Venbai and made peace 

with them, accepting the hand of a Ganga princ^ for his son. 

KIrtivarman II was the last ruler of the Chalukya line of 
Badami. His power was steadily undermined by the activity or 
the Rashtrakuta prince Dantidurga who was in occupation of 
Ellora in 74.2. But the main scene of Dantidurga s early activities 
lay on the banks of the Mahl, Narmada and Mahanadi. He 
subdued the Gutjaras of Malwa, the rulers of Kosala and Kahnga 
and the Telugu-Chodas of the Sr«aila country. Above all, he 
went down to Kanchl and, after a demonstration of force, struck 
up an alliance with Nandivarman Pallavamalla to whom he gave 
his daughter Reva in marriage. Having thus deprived Klrtivannan 
of his outlying provinces and strengthened his political position, 
Dantidurga delivered the final assault on KIrtivarman sometime 
in 752 or 753 and proclaimed himself the sovereign power in 
Deccan. KIrtivarman continued to rule in an obscure way for 









CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 151 

in Tondainad. The coalition against him thus failed utterly, 
and Nandivarman did not succeed in his attempts to check the 
Pandya. 

Varaguna I had still other successes to his credit. He led an 
expedition into Venad, South Travancore, attacked the strongly 
fortified port of Vilinam and brought the country under his rule. 
He also waged successful war against the Ay chieftain of the inter- 
vening mountainous country who had perhaps been friendly to 
the ruler of Venad. As a result of these wars, Pandya sway extended 
well beyond Trichinopoly into the Tanjore, Salem and Coimbatore 
districts, and all that lay south was under him. The expansion 
continued under his son and successor Srimara Srivallabha 
(815-62) who invaded Ceylon in the reign of Sena I (831-51), 
ravaged the northern province and sacked the capital. Eventually 
Sena made terms with the conqueror and the Pandya forces 
quitted the island. Srimara had next to deal with a formidable 
combination formed against him again under the leadership of the 
Pallavas. We must now turn for a while to Pallava history. 

After the failure of his plans against Varaguna, Nandivarman 
Pallavamalla continued to rule till about 795. Pallavamalla Was 
a worshipper of Vishnu and a great patron of learning. He 
renovated old temples and built several new ones. Among the 
latter was the Vaikuntha-perumal temple at Kanchipuram which 
contains inscribed panels of sculpture portraying the events leading 
up to the accession of Pallavamalla to the throne. The great 
Vaishnava saint Tirumangai Alvar was his contemporary. 

Nandivarman was succeeded by his son Dantivarman 
(c. 795-845). The northern expansion of the Pandya power under 
Varaguna I and Srimara deprived Dantivarman of a considerable 
part of his territory in the south; and in addition, he had to face 
the hostility of the rising power of the Rashtrakutas. It is now 
necessary to trace the history of that power. 

Dantidurga died childless and was succeeded about 756 by 
his uncle Krishna I. He completed the overthrow of the Chalukya 
power and expanded the new kingdom in all directions. He 
conquered southern Konkan and established the Silara family 
there as a feudatory power. He invaded the Ganga territory, 
defeated Sripurusha (768) and compelled him to acknowledge his 
suzerainty. Against the Eastern Chalukya kingdom of Vengi he 
dispatched an expedition under the crown prince Govinda II 



!52 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

to whom Vijayaditya I (755-72), ruler of Vengi, made his sub- 
mission without a fight (769-70). Krishna, who built the celebrated 
Kailasa temple at Ellora, was succeeded by Govinda II some time 
between 772 and 775. In 777-8, Govinda co-operated with 
Nandivarman Pallavamalla in assisting Sivamara II to gam the 
Ganga throne against the opposition of his brother, Duggamara 
Ereyappa. Govinda was an easygoing monarch and his ambitious 
brother Dhruva planned to seize the throne for himself. Govinda 
sought the aid of the Pallava and the Ganga, and the rulers of 
Vengi and Malwa; but Dhruva defeated them and thus became 
king. How exactly Govinda ended his life is not known. Dhruva s 
accession took place about 780 and his first task was to punish 
Govinda’s allies. He caught and imprisoned Sivamara II, and 
levied a tribute of elephants from Pallavamalla. He crossed the 
Vindhyas and drove the Gurjara king of Malwa, Vatsaraja by name, 
into the desert. He proceeded against Vengi, and Vishnuvardhana 
IV had to purchase peace by parting with some territory besides 
offering the hand of his daughter Silamahadevi to Dhruva. 
Dhruva followed up his success in Malwa by a raid into the 
Ganges-Jumna doab where he met and defeated Dharmapala of 
Bengal. Towards the close of his reign, Dhruva abdicated and 
made Govinda III, the ablest of his sons, emperor. This led to 
trouble soon after Dhruva’s death in 793-4, when Govinda III 
had to face the hostility of his disinherited brothers, particularly 
that of Kambha, the eldest. To gain support, Govinda released 
Sivamara II from prison, but contrary to expectations that monarch 
threw in his lot with Kambha. Single-handed, Govinda defeated 
the confederacy of twelve rulers but used his victory with modera- 
tion, even reinstating Kambha as viceroy over Gangavadi; while 
Indra, a younger brother of Govinda who had stood by him, was 
rewarded with the viceroyalty of Lata. Sivamara II, however, 
was again put in prison. After putting down opposition at home 
Govinda III carried his arms into Northern India. He inflicted 
a decisive defeat on the Gurjara ruler of Malwa, Nagabhata II, 
and on his ally Chandragupta, of unknown identity. Malwa was 
annexed for a time to Lata. Govinda proceeded farther north and 
received the submission of Chakrayudha of Kanauj and his protector 
Dharmapala. On his return (802) he fixed his camp at Sribhavana 
on the banks of the Narmada where a son was bom to him, the 
future Amoghavarsha I. From Sribhavana, he dashed across 



CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 153 

the Deccan into the Pallava country (803-4). He defeated 
Dantivarman, entered his capital Kanchi and there received the 
submission offered by an embassy from Ceylon before he retired 
to the banks of the Tungabhadra and fixed his camp at Ramesvara- 
tirtha. The rulers of Vengi, Vishnuvardhana IV and his successor 
Vijayaditya II (8o8), felt the impact of Govinda’s power. Vijaya- 
ditya was a great fighter who earned for himself the title 
Narendramrigaraja (Lion among Kings). Govinda III created 
trouble for him by supporting his half-brother Bhima Saluki’s 
rival claims to the throne of Vengi. One of the greatest monarchs 
of the line, Govinda’s achievements go far to justify the claim of 
his court-poets that after his birth the Rashtrakutas became as 
unassailable as the Yadavas after the birth of Sri Krishna. 

To return to affairs farther south; during his fairly long reign, 
the Pallava Dantivarman found himself unable to resist the 
aggression of the Pandyas from the south or even hold his own 
against the Rashtrakutas in the north. He was followed by his son 
Nandivarman III (844-66), a much abler monarch than his father, 
who organized a strong confederacy against his aggressive Pandya 
contemporary Srimara Srivallabha, and early in his reign he inflicted 
a severe defeat on the Pandya at Tellaru in the Wandiwash 
taluk of the North Arcot district. His allies were the Gangas, the 
Cholas, and even the Rashtrakutas. The location of the field of 
battle shows the extent to which Pandya aggression had developed, 
and this doubtless made it easy for Nandivarman to find support. 
The victory of Tellaru was a turning point. It gave Nandi the 
permanent title ‘TeUarerinda’ and was followed up by further 
successes as a result of which the Pandya forces were rolled back 
into their home country, and the Pallava army advanced as far 
as the banks of the Vaigai, in the heart of the Pandya kingdom. 

Later, however, Srimara recovered his strength and about 
859 was able to defeat Nandivarman and his confederates in a 
battle near Kumbakonam. 

Nandivarman III was undoubtedly too great a monarch to 
suffer by this defeat. Not only did he restore the Pallava power 
to its former glory, but he was also a liberal patron of literature 
and the arts in general. He is also said to have maintained a power- 
ful fleet : a Tamil inscription at Takua-pa in Siam, on the opposite 
coast of the Bay, attests to his overseas connexions by mentioning 
a Vishnu temple and a tank called Avaninaranam after one of his 






CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 1S5 

as the ruler of Lata, Dhruva I, son of that Karka who had so ably 
protected Amoghavarsha earlier. Bankesa killed Dhruva I in 
battle and continued the war with his son Akalavarsha and his 
grandson Dhruva II. Dhruva II was, however, threatened in 
his rear by the Gurjara ruler Mihira Bhoja, and some of his own 
kinsmen had turned hostile to him at home. He thus thought it 
wise to compose his quarrel with Amoghavarsha in 860, and was 
thereby enabled to thwart the designs of the Gurjara and his 
hostile kinsmen, so that we find him secure on his throne again 
in 867. 

After the recall of Bankesa, the war against the rebels in the 
Ganga kingdom was entrusted to Gunaga Vijayaditya who led an 
expedition into the Nolamba kingdom as its ruler Nolambadhiraja I , 
also called Mangi, had joined the rebellion. Mangi was slain in 
battle and the road to Gangavadi opened up. Then the Ganga 
army was beaten in its turn and NItimarga obliged to make peace. 

By temperament Amoghavarsha was a religious man who loved 
literature more than fighting. He is said to have retired from his 
court more than once to spend time in the company of Jaina 
monks. It is doubtful, however, whether he formally renounced 
Hinduism, though a small Jaina catechism entitled Prasnottara- 
ratna-malika is attributed to him. He was himself an author and 
a liberal patron of authors. He is also celebrated as the maker of 
the city of Manyakheta, the city built to excel that of Indra. His 
palace was full of fine workmanship and included an extensive 
apartment for the royal princesses and a tank. Amoghavarsha was 
succeeded by Krishna II (880). 

In concluding the political history of the period we may note 
that Kalinga was throughout under the rule of the line of Eastern 
Gangas, who in spite of their name have no apparent connexion in 
this period with the Gangas of Mysore. They dated their inscrip- 
tions in an era of their own beginning with the equivalent of a.d. 509. 
Their external contacts were few, though sometimes the politics 
of the Telugu country to the south under the Vishnukundins and 
their successors, the Eastern Chalukyas, occasionally forced itself 
on their attention. They made their submission to Pulakesin II 
(c. 620) when he invaded the eastern Deccan and later perhaps 
also to the Rashtrakuta Dantidurga (c. 750). But to judge from 
their grants they generally led a peaceful existence without 
disturbing their neighbours or being troubled by them. 




ciling the different interests and points of view. Guilds of 
merchants like the Nanadeiis, the Manigramam and the Five 
Hundred of Ayyavole, associations of craftsmen, artisans and 
manufacturers like the braziers, oil-mongers and weavers, and of 
students, ascetics, temple servants, priests, and so on, besides the 
territorial assemblies of the village and higher divisions — all 
functioned more or less independently of the government of the 

Secondly, the duty of protecting society was cast by theory 
on a special class, the Kshatriyas, and by a natural and easy 
transition anyone who felt equal to the task of undertaking the 
rule of a particular area and did not hesitate to do so was more or 
less readily accepted as the ruler. Each successful adventurer 
became a king and gained respectability by maintaining a liberal 






acceptance of this ideal led to frequent wars and skirmishes 
resulting in changes in the relative precedence of the different 
powers involved. Lastly, and as a consequence of these two 
factors, political changes did not have in India such profound 
effects on the structure of society and civilization as elsewhere, 
although the establishment and the continued prosperity of an 
empire often, indeed, meant an era of high endeavour and achieve- 
ment in literature and the arts. 

The organization which made for the continuity of life and 
tradition, held society together, and carried it safe through the 
storms and turmoils of political revolution was the autonomous, 
self-sufficient village. It was the primary cell of the body politic, 
and the vitality of its institutions is well-attested by hundreds of 
inscriptions from all parts of the country. Usually, it comprised 
a number of families, each occupying a house of its own in the 
residential quarter of the village, owning its own share of the 
arable land, and enjoying privileges like the right to graze cattle 
and gather firewood in the waste land and forest lying round 
about and held in common by the villagers as a body. A Pallava 
grant mentions some land in a village as the property of the king, 
which goes directly against the view sometimes expressed that all 
land belonged to the king in the ancient Indian State. A careful 
record of the boundaries of a village and of the individual estates 
in it was maintained. The villagers met periodically to consider 
matters of common concern and for the settlement of disputes and 
the administration of justice. Everywhere rural administration 
grew from timid and tentative improvisations to the more 
elaborate and complicated machinery of committees and officials 
that we find described in the Chola inscriptions of the tenth and 
eleventh centuries, and in this evolution the Tamil country 
appears to have been more progressive than the rest of South 
India. The village had a headman, variously called mutuda, kilan, 
gramabhojaka and so on, who was its leader and mediator with the 
royal government. How he was appointed and whether the office 
was hereditary cannot be determined. The village elders are also 
particularly mentioned besides the headmen and the assembly. 



158 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

From the eighth and ninth centuries a.d. three types of tillage 
-lssemblies are traceable in Tamil inscriptions, namely, the «r 
the sabha, and the nagaram. The hr was the common type which 
included all classes of people who held the land in the village. 
The sabha was an exclusively brahmin assembly of villages given 
as gifts to brahmins where all the land belonged to them. The 
nagaram was quite another type pertaining to localities where 
traders and merchants were in a dominant position. In many 
instances the different types existed side by side in the same locality . 
Whenever necessary, there was mutual consultation among these 
different assemblies and other local associations, and the general 
rule was to consult all the interests concerned in a matter before a 
decision was taken on it. The village assembly regulated irriga- 
tion rights administered charitable endowments, maintained tanks 
and roads and managed the affairs of temples, either directly or 
by means of executive officers and committees working under it. 
It also made rules for regulating its own procedure. 

In the Deccan we come across many references to the mahajanas 
of villages who were in charge of the local administration under 
the leadership of gamundas. The royal officials stood in closer 
relation to the working of the village assemblies here than in the 
more autonomous townships of the Tamil country. 

Unless specially exempted, the villages were liable to visits from 
royal officers for digging for salt, the manufacture of sugar and 
the arrest of culprits. They also had to supply draught bulls to 
help the progress of touring officers, besides other amenities such 
as accommodation, beds, boiled rice, milk, curds, grass, fuel, and 
green vegetables, besides free labour on specified public^ works. 
In addition to the land tax and these occasional demands from 
officials, the people were subjected to a variety of imposts, direct 
and indirect. Houses and professions were taxed, market dues 
and tolls on merchandise moved from place to place were collected, 
besides judicial dues and fines. Arab writers who knew western 
India well thought that the people of India were heavily taxed, 
so that their monarchs might have their treasuries full. To 
complete the picture, we must note that besides these compulsory 
levies, central and local, a number of voluntary imposts for parti- 
cular purposes such as the maintenance of a tank, temple, feeding 
house, college or hospital were undertaken by particular corpora- 
tions, mostly by merchants. 


CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 1S9 

Above the grama was the administrative division called ahara , 
rashtra, nadu, kottam, or vishaya at different times and places. 
Rashtra and vishaya often figure as two categories, one larger than 
the other. In the Tamil country the larger division was often 
called valanadu or mandalam. The size of these units often 
depended on accidents of history, e.g., Banaraja-vishaya of the 
Badami period. In this division also there was an assembly of 
elders and a chief executive official known as desabhojaka, 
nattukkon and so on. 

Provincial offices were often held by princes of the royal 
family. This was an advantage when there was unity in the 
family but when differences arose it easily led to civil war and 
disruption, as for instance in the Chalukya empire of Badami 
during the interval between the death of Pulakesin II and the 
accession of Vikramaditya I. There were groups of officers 
charged with the maintenance of the peace and securing the 
safety of life and property who went by different names in 
different kingdoms. Local policing was to some extent done by 
village officials. There were also bailiffs ( sasana sancdrin ) who 
went about the country enforcing the execution of the orders 
of government and the decrees of law-courts, and they were 
aided in the discharge of their duties by a constabulary ( bhatas ). 
We hear also of a superintendent of the treasury (kosadhyaksha) 
and officers engaged in the survey and assessment of cultivated 
lands ( nilakkalattar and adhikari). Lastly there were the vayil 
ketpar, i.e., hearers of oral orders issued by the king, also called 
rahasyddhikrita. They were the secretaries who attended on the 
king, listened to his orders, and subsequently wrote them out in 
proper form and had them communicated to the officials con- 
cerned for proper action. Such orders were called rajairavitam 
under the Chalukyas and the Rashtrakutas. Besides village 
courts and caste and guild panchayats for the settlement of 
disputes, there were law-courts called adhikaranas or dharmasanas 
maintained by the central government for the administration of 
justice. They were presided over by state officials assisted by 
advisers learned in the law ( dharmasanabhattas ). A scene in the 
farce Mattavilasa by King Mahendravarman suggests that the 
courts were not altogether free from corruption. In the absence 
of other evidence ordeals (divya) were resorted to for proof. 

There is no clear proof of the existence of a regularly 



160 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

constituted council of ministers although the mantrimandala 
(group of ministers) took part in the events preceding the coro- 
nation of Nandivarman II Pallavamalla. 

The king was the head of the state, the fountain of honour, 
judge, and leader of the armed forces. The early kings in this 
period called themselves dharmamaharajadhirajas, in token of 
their active promotion of Vedic dharma as against Buddhism and 
Jainism which had made much headway in the country in the 
earlier period, but there were Jaina monarchs also, particularly 
among the Gangas. The kings speciaUy favoured the particular 
religious creed they professed but never sought to impose it on 
all their subjects; rather they patronized as a matter of policy all 
the other creeds. After a political revolution, social and econo- 
mic stability was ensured by express proclamations that all pre- 
existing rights of property and the charitable foundations would 
be respected by the new rulers. 

Succession to the throne was usually hereditary in the eldest 
male line. Princes were educated according to the best standards 
of the time in literature, law, philosophy and the martial arts, and 
trained in administrative positions suited to their capacities and 
tastes. The attempt of MangaleSa to shut Pulakesin II, for whom 
he acted as regent, permanently out of his rights met with a 
deserved failure as public opinion supported Pulakeiin. The 
success of Vikramaditya in checking the disruption of the 
Chalukya empire after the death of Pulakesin II has also been 
noticed above, and Vikramaditya was not the eldest son of 
Pulakesin. The choice of Nandivarman II as king from a col- 
lateral branch when succession failed in the male line may also 
be recalled. One of the royal insignia which the deputation to 
his father Hiranyavarman carried with them was a diadem of the 
shape of an elephant’s scalp. The history of the Rashtrakutas 
and of the Eastern Chalukyas was marred by a number of dis- 
puted successions and civil wars. Among the latter this was 
accentuated by the interference of the Rashtrakutas. The choice 
of Govinda III for succession by Dhruva led inevitably to a civil 
war started by his eldest son Kambha whose cl aims had been 
passed over, but the event justified the choice of Govinda for 

Each royal family had its own banner ( dhvaja ) and seal 
(lanchana) mentioned prominently in their inscriptions. The 


CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 


royal palace was maintained in great state, and elephants and 
horses captured in war were exhibited at the palace gate. Queens 
occupied a position of equal importance with the king. Silabhat- 
tarika, Dhruva’s wife, bore the imperial titles Paramesvari and 
Paramabhattarika, made grants of land at her own will, and issued 
her own orders to the executive officers of government. Ranga- 
pataka, the wife of Pallava Rajasimha, interested herself in the 
construction of the Kailasanatha temple. 

Though the king was in theory an autocrat, there were several 
modifying factors in practice. All the members of the royal 
family shared in the administration as far as possible and had 
opportunities of influencing the king’s policy. Then there were 
the high officials of the state, some of whose offices were heredi- 
tary and commanded the respect of the monarch by their 
descent, ability, and character. The presence of numerous feuda- 
tory monarchs and the domination of social life by the numerous 
corporate organizations spoken of above went far to mitigate the 
bad consequences of the rule of incapable or misguided sovereigns. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 



162 


A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 
CHALUKYAS OF BADAMI 


Jayasimha I 
Ranaraga 

Pulake^in I 543/4-566 

. ' 1 

Kirtivarman I 566/7-597/8 MangaleSa 597/8-609/10 

PulakeL'n II Vishnu vardhana Jayasimha 

609/10-642 


i t T I I u 

Chandraditya Adityavarma Vikramaditya Jayasunha Ambera 
654/5-681 

Vinayaditya 

681-696 

Vijayaditya 

696-733/34 

Vikramaditya II 
733/4-744/45 
.1 



CONFLICT OF THREE EMPIRES 
PALLAVAS 


163 


Nandivarman 

1. Simhavishnu (A.D. 574-600) 

2. Mahendravarman I (a.d. 600-630) 

3. Narasimhavarman I (630-668) 

4. Mahendravarman II (668-670) 

5. Parame^varavarman I (670-680) 

6. Narasimhavarman II (680-720) 

. I 

7. Parame^varavarman II Mahendravarr 

(720-731) 


Buddhavarman 

Adityavarman 

Govindavarman 

Hiranyavarman 


| 


n III 


10. Nan 
(844-866) 

1 1 . Nripatungavarman 
(855-896) 



16 4 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

PANDYAS A.D. 590-920 

1. Kadungon (590-620) 

2. Maravarman Avanisulamani (620-645) 

^ 3. Sendan (645-670) 

4. Arikesari Maravarman (670-700) 

5. Koccadaiyan (700-730) 

6. Maravarman Rajasimha I (730-765) 

7. Jatila !parantaka Nedunjadaiyan (765-815) 

8. Srimara Srivallabha (815-862) 

9. Varagunavarman II (862-880) 

10. Parantaka Viranarayana (880-900) 

11. Maravarman Rajasimhha II (900-920) 



The emergence of the Chola power from obscurity, its rise to 
an imperial position and its conflicts — first with the Rashtrakutas 
from beyond the Tungabhadra and later with their successors, 
the Chalukyas of Kalyani — form the dominant features of the 
history of the next 350 years (850-1200). The whole country 
south of the Tungabhadra was united and held as one state for 
a period of two centuries and more. The power of the new empire 
was proclaimed to the eastern world by the celebrated expedition 
to the Ganges which Rajendra I undertook and by the overthrow 
after an unprecedented naval war of the maritime empire of 
Sri Vijaya, as well as by the repeated ‘embassies’ to China. In 
their wars with their enemies across the Tungabhadra, the Cholas 
were generally aided by the Eastern Chalukyas, a dynasty which 
drew closer and closer to the Cholas by marriage alliances until 
at last, in 1070, one ruler occupied both the Chola and the Vengi 




166 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

thrones. The result of this union was an intensification of the 
hostility of the Western Chalukyas. Towards the close of the 
twelfth century, the two major powers had become thoroughly 
exhausted by their conflicts and were on their decline. Smaller 
powers standing in a subordinate relation to them were beginning 
to show new vigour and getting ready to take advantage of the 
weakening of their suzerains and proclaim their independence— 
the Pandyas in the extreme south, the Hoysalas in Mysore, and the 
Yadavas and the Kakatlyas in the northern Deccan. 

The Cholas built up a remarkably efficient administrative 
system which combined vigorous central control with a very large 
measure of local autonomy. The great temples of Tanjore and 
Gangaikondaiolapuram as also those of Dara^uram and Tribhu- 
vani, not to speak of numerous smaller temples elsewhere, attest to 
this day the grandeur and the excellence of Chola architecture 
and sculpture. Other fine arts like painting, music, and dancing 
were liberally patronized. Literature flourished much more 
than ever before. 

The capture of Tanjore by Vijayalaya, some time before 850, 
and his founding of a temple there to the Goddess Nishumbha- 
sudinl (Durga) were the first steps in the rise of the Chola power. 
He was perhaps a Pallava feudatory at the time, and he must have 
wrested Tanjore from the Muttarayar who had transferred their 
allegiance from the Pallava to the Pandya. The success of Vijaya- 
laya meant the weakening of Pandya influence north of the 
kaveri and the strengthening of the power of Nripatunga who by 
the victory of Ariiil had already retrieved the Pallava power from 
the disgrace it had suffered from Srimara Srivallabha (see p. 154). 

Now his successor, the Pandya Varagunavarman II, invaded 
the Chola country to check the growing Pallava influence. This 
invasion began well enough, and Idavai, a village on the north 
bank of the Kaveri in the Chola country, was reached ( c . 879). 
But Varagunavarman soon came up against a formidable combi- 
nation. The forces that opposed him were led by Aparajita, the 
son of Nripatungavarman, who had become yuvaraja, the Chola 
Aditya I, who had succeeded Vijayalaya about 871, and the Ganga 
Prithvipati I who responded to the call from the Pallava monarch. 
A decisive battle was fought at Sripurambiyam near Kumbakonam 
in 880, and the Pandyan monarch suffered a crushing defeat, 
although Prithvipati I lost his life in the battle. Aditya I was 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 167 

not only allowed to keep what his father has taken from the Mutta- 
rayar, but some new territory was added to it by his grateful 
Pallava overlord. Aditya I, however, did not rest content with 
a subordinate position. He planned and carried out the overthrow 
of the effete power of his suzerian. He invaded Tondaimandalam, 
and in a battle that ensued he pounced upon Aparajita when he 
was mounted on an elephant and slew him. That was the end of 
Pallava rule in Tondainad, and the whole of the Pallava kingdom 
now became Chola territory which henceforth bordered on that of 
the Rashtrakutas (897). The Ganga Prithvipati II, grandson 
of Prithvipati I, soon afterwards acknowledged the suzerainty of 
Aditya. Aditya next conquered the Kongu country also, perhaps 
from the Pandya ruler Parantaka Viranarayana (880-900), the 
younger brother and successor of Varagunavarman. Aditya was 
on friendly terms with the contemporary Chera ruler Sthanuravi, 
whose daughter was married to his son Parantaka. He is said to 
have built tall stone temples of Siva on both banks of the Kaveri 
from the Sahyadri to the sea. He died at Tondaimanad near 
Kalahasti, and a temple was erected over his remains by his pious 
son Parantaka, who succeeded him on the throne in 907 and ruled 
for forty-eight years. The best part of his reign was marked by 
increasing success and prosperity, although it ended in disaster 
and gloom brought about by the hostility of the Rashtrakutas which 
began to pursue him almost from the beginning. Soon after 
his accession, as early as 910, he invaded the Pandyan country 
and assumed the title Maduraikonda (‘Capturer of Madura’). The 
Pandyan ruler at the time, Maravarman Rajasimha II (900-20,) 
the son of Parantaka Viranarayana, appealed for help to Kassapa V, 
ruler of Ceylon, who sent an army to his aid. In due course, 
however, Parantaka defeated the combined armies at the battle 
of Vellur. Rajasimha had to flee to Ceylon and the Chola conquest 
of the Pandya country was completed soon after. After staying 
in Ceylon for some years, Rajasimha left his crown and all his 
wealth behind, and betook himself to Kerala, the home of his 
mother. Some years later, in the reign of Udaya IV of Ceylon 
(940-53), Parantaka made an unsuccessful attempt to capture the 
insignia of the Pandyan king. His failure was remembered and 
made up for several years later by his powerful descendant 
Rajendra I. 

While the Pandyan conquest was in progress, Parantaka had to 



168 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

encounter an invasion from the Rashtrakuta Krishna II who had 
succeeded Amoghavarsha in 880. With the aid of his Lata feuda- 
tory and kinsman, Krishna II successfully resisted an invasion by 
the Gutjara ruler Bhoja I and soon after abolished the viceroyalty 
of Lata, extending his own direct rule into that country. His 
attempt to subjugate the powerful Vengi ruler Gunaga Vijayaditya 
III ended in disaster. He had to seek refuge in the court of his 
father-in-law, the Chedi king Kakkala, whither the Eastern 
Chalukya general Pandaranga pursued him. The war ended 
when Krishna submitted to Vijayaditya, in return for which his 
capital and kingdom were restored to him. He renewed the 
conflict, however, after the death of Gunaga Vijayaditya III, in 
892, and invaded Vengi before the new ruler Chalukya Bhima I, 
a nephew of Vijayaditya, could celebrate his coronation. Chalukya 
Bhima was defeated and taken prisoner, but soon regained his 
freedom, cleared the country of the Rashtrakuta forces and duly 
crowned himself king. Some years later Krishna made another 
unsuccessful attempt to reduce Vengi, but was beaten in two 
battles at Niravadyapura and Peruvanguru. 

One of Krishna’s daughters married the Chola monarch 
Aditya I and bore him a son called Kannaradeva. When Parantaka 
became king, at the death of Aditya I, and prince Kannara was 
kept from the throne, Krishna espoused the cause of his grandson 
and invaded the Chola territory with the assistance of the Banas 
and Vaidumbas. Parantaka was assisted by the Ganga ruler 
Prithvipati II, and a decisive battle was fought at Vallala, modem 
Tiruvallam in the North Arcot district, which ended in disaster 
for Krishna and his allies. The Banas lost their territory, which 
was handed over to Prithvipati II, and the Vaidumbas also suffered 
for the support they had offered. The Rashtrakuta war took 
place before 916. 

From about 940 Parantaka began to experience increasing 
difficulty in defending his empire. His loyal feudatory, Prithvipati 
II, was no more; and as Butuga II, the ruling Ganga monarch, had 
married a Rashtrakuta princess (the sister of Krishna III) the 
alliance between Gangas and Rashtrakutas became closer. 
Those Banas and Vaidumbas whom the Chola had uprooted were 
also by the side of the Rashtrakuta ruler. To meet the expected 
trouble from the north-west frontier of his kingdom, Parantaka 
stationed his eldest son Rajaditya there with a large army including 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 169 

an elephant corps and some cavalry, and sent another son, Ariku- 
lakesari, to assist him. 

We must now turn once more to Rashtrakuta history. 
Krishna II was succeeded by his grandson Indra III about 915. 
Even as yuvaraja, Indra had checked an invasion from the North 
by the Paramara ruler Upendra of Malwa. Upendra sought to 
take advantage of the preoccupation of Krishna II in the Chola 
war and invaded the Rashtrakuta kingdom. Indra defeated him, 
and compelled him to acknowledge Rashtrakuta suzerainty. 
After his accession, Indra waged successful war against the Pratihara 
ruler, Mahipala I of Kanauj (913-43). Mahipala lost his kingdom 
for a while though he recovered it later, with the aid of the Chandela 
ruler, Harshadeva. Towards Vengi, Indra followed the usual 
policy of setting up opposition to the ruling king Amma I who, 
however, held his own and ruled the kingdom for seven years till 
926. But his death was followed by a period of confused success- 
ion disputes which gave Indra III occasion to bring the bulk of 
the Vengi country under the occupation of his officers and nobles 
for a period of seven years. Indra was succeeded by his son 
Amoghavarsha II in 927. After a reign of only three years, he 
fell a victim to the foul play of his ambitious younger brother 
Govinda IV, a dissolute and incompetent ruler, who in his turn 
was removed from the throne by his feudatories who bestowed 
the kingdom on Baddega Amoghavarsha III, a half-brother of 
Indra III. Amoghavarsha III was a gentle and peaceful monarch, 
but not so his young and energetic son Krishna III, whom he made 
yuvaraja. By waging war against Racamalla, Krishna enabled 
his brother-in-law, Butuga II, to attain the Ganga throne. He 
became king at the death of his father in 939. Within a few 
years thereafter he naturally thought of paying off old scores 
against the Chola power and was urged to the task by the insistence 
of the Banas and Vaidumbas and perhaps also of Butuga II. 
With Butuga he invaded the Chola kingdom and won a decisive 
victory (949) in a battle at Takkolam, six miles to the south-east 
of Arkonam, in which Butuga killed Rajaditya with a well-aimed 
arrow when he was on elephant-back. Even this decisive battle 
did not mean the collapse of all resistance to Krishna’s advance, 
however, and he still had some years of hard fighting before he 
could establish himself in the South. Eventually he succeeded 
in occupying a large part of the northern half of the Chola empire 



170 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

and established his own men in the rule of that country. He 
assumed the title ‘Conqueror of Kacci (Kanchi) and Tanjai 
(Tanjore)’, and thus caused the Chola empire a rude shock at 
the close of Parantaka’s reign. Indeed, it almost ceased to exist 
as its vassals in the south took advantage of its disasters in the 
north and proclaimed their independence. 

Like most of his predecessors Krishna III fomented trouble 
in Vengi by setting up against Amma II, his elder half-brother, 
Danamava and two princes of a collateral branch, Badapa and 
Tala II. With many interruptions Amma continued to hold on to 
his kingdom until 970 when he was slain in a battle by Danamava. 

Towards the close of his reign, about 963, Krishna invaded 
Northern India and compelled the Paramara ruler, Harsha Siyaka 
of Malwa, once more to acknowledge Rashtrakuta suzerainty. 
In this expedition Krishna was ably assisted by the Ganga 
Marasimha, son of Butuga II. An able soldier and generous 
friend, Krishna would appear to have lacked statesmanship, 
for his policy stored up trouble for his successors. He unduly 
encouraged the Gangas and irritated the Paramaras without 
being able to subjugate them. He was reckless in awarding 
fiefs (anuga jivita) to his lieutenants as when he gave the province 
of Tardavadi in the heart of the empire to Ahavamalla Tailaparasa 
of the SatyaSraya family, some time before 965. 

Krishna III was succeeded by his half-brother Khottiga early 
in 967. In his reign, the Paramara Harsha Siyaka invaded the 
Rashtrakuta kingdom after defeating its forces on the banks of the 
Narmada and sacked the capital Manyakheta (Malkhed) in 972-3. 
Once more Marasimha II assisted his overlord in regaining the 
capital after the Paramara forces withdrew. Khottiga died soon 
after the Paramara raid, and was followed by his nephew Karka II 
(973). He was dethroned within a few months by the Chalukya, 
Taila II, who had been biding his time ever since he got Tardavadi 
for his fief from Krishna III. Later tradition hailed Taila as an 
incarnation of the Lord Sri Krishna who fought 108 battles 
against the race of Ratta demons and captured 88 fortresses from 
them. Taila’s success was the beginning of the Chalukyan empire 
of Kalyani. Marasimha II made a futile attempt to revive Rashtra- 
kuta power by setting up Indra IV, the issue of a son of Krishna III 
by a sister of Marasimha himself. Marasimha killed himself 
by starvation ( sallekhana ) in 975. His feudatory Pancala-deva 






THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 171 

who claimed sovereignty over the whole country south of the 
Krishna river was also killed by Taila in battle. Indra IV also 
performed sallekhana in 982. 

In the Chola kingdom, the thirty years (955-85) that followed 
the close of Parantaka’s reign formed a period of weakness and 
confusion. His immediate successor was his son Gandaraditya, 
who with his queen Sembiyan-mahadevi claims a bigger place in 
the domain of religion than of politics. At his death in 957, 
the Chola kingdom had shrunk to the size of a small principality, 
and Krishna III still continued in occupation of Tondaimandalam. 
Gandaraditya’s brother Arinjaya had a short reign (956-7) and 
was succeeded by his son Sundara Chola Parantaka II (957-73). 
His young son Aditya II was made yuvaraja almost at the begin- 
ning of the reign. Sundara Chola turned his attention to the south, 
where Vira Pandya claimed independence after defeating a Chola 
king, probably Gandaraditya. As usual, the Pandya had Mahinda 
IV, ruler of Ceylon, as his ally. In the war that followed, Sundara 
Chola defeated Vira Pandya in two battles ; Aditya II killed Vira 
Pandya on the second occasion. Sundara Chola’s forces also 
invaded Ceylon (959). These wars in the south did not result in 
the re-establishment of the Chola power there, but better success 
seems to have attended Sundara’s attempts in the north. He is 
said to have died in 973 in his golden palace at Kanchi while 
still engaged in directing campaigns in the north. His last years 
were clouded by a tragedy. Uttama Chola, son of Gandaraditya, 
conspired to murder the yuvaraja Aditya II (969), and then com- 
pelled the aggrieved father to recognize him as heir-apparent in 
preference to his own younger son Arumoli (afterwards Rajaraja I). 
Uttama Chola accordingly became king at Sundara’s death (973). 
By then the bulk of Tondaimandalam had been recovered from 
the Rashtrakutas for the Chola empire. The Rashtrakutas had 
given place to Taila II Chalukya who claims a victory against 
Uttama Chola about 980. 

The real greatness of the Chola empire dates, however, from 
the accession of Arumolivarman, who crowned himself as Rajaraja 
in the middle of 985. The thirty years of his rule constitute the 
formative period of Chola imperialism. A relatively small state 
at his accession, hardly recovering from the effects of the Rashtra- 
kuta invasion, the Chola kingdom grew under him into an exten- 
sive and well-knit empire efficiently organized and administered, 



172 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

rich in resources, and possessed of a powerful standing army and 

navy, well tried and equal to the greatest enterprises. 

Rajaraja began his conquests by attacking the confederation 
between the rulers of the Pandya and Kerala kingdoms and of 
Ceylon. In two campaigns he destroyed the Pandyas and conquer- 
ed the haughty Kerala kings by attacking Kandalur and Vilinam. 
In a third campaign, a naval expedition, he overran the northern 
part of Ceylon, forcing Mahinda V to take refuge in the hill 
country in the south-east of the island. Anuradhapura was destroy- 
ed, and Polonnaruva became the capital of a Chola province. 
Elsewhere Gangapadi, Nolambapadi, and Tadigaipadi, all parts 
of modem Mysore, were conquered and annexed, which intensified 
the conflict with the new power of the Chalukyas under Taila II. 
The first battle fought in 992 went against the Cholas. Rajaraja’s 
chief enemy, however, was SatyaSraya, the son and successor of 
Taila II. Before recounting their trial of strength we must now 
turn for a while to Chalukyan history. 

After the overthrow of the Rashtrakuta power, Taila II, who 
ruled from Manyakheta, spent several years consolidating his sway 
in the western Deccan over the whole area between the Narmada 
and the Tungabhadra. When Paramara Munja of Malwa invaded 
his kingdom from the north, he defeated him and put him to death 
after some years of confinement during which he developed a 





THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 173 

daughter Kundavai in marriage to the younger, and promised 
to restore the elder (Saktivarman I) to his ancestral throne. 
Jata-Choda Bhlma was defeated and taken prisoner, so that the 
way became clear for Saktivarman to start his rule in the Vengi 
kingdom, though only as a subordinate of the great Chola 
monarch who had helped him. 

Unable to brook this extension of Chola power into the eastern 
Deccan, Satyasraya invaded Vengi in 1006, his general Baya- 
lanambi reducing the forts of Dhanyakataka (Dharanikota) and 
Yanamadala to ashes, and established himself in Chebrolu in the 
Guntur district. Acting on the principle that attack is the best 
form of defence, Rajaraja ordered his son Rajendra to invade 
Western Chalukya at the head of a strong army (1007). Rajendra 
marched up to Donur in the Bijapur district and, in the words of a 
Chalukya inscription, ‘plundered the entire country, slaughtering 
women, children and brahmins’. He also captured Banavasi and 
a good part of the Raichur doab, and sacked Manyakheta. At 
the same time another section of the army operating from Vengi 
advanced on Kollipakkai (Kulpak), 45 miles north-west of Hyder- 
abad, and captured its fortress. Satyasraya was thus compelled 
to withdraw his forces from Vengi and only with difficulty succeed- 
ed in freeing his country of the Chola army, which retired behind 
the Tungabhadra with much booty. 

Towards the close of his reign Rajaraja conquered and annexed 
the Maldives. He formally installed Rajendra as yuvaraja in 
1012. The magnificent Siva temple Rajarajesvara at Tanjore, 
completed in 1010, fittingly commemorates the glory of his reign 
which came to an end with his death in 1014. Rajaraja encouraged 
Srimara Vijayottungavarman, the Sailendra ruler of Sri Vijaya 
(Palembang) and ICataha (Kedah) across the Bay, to build a 
Buddhist vihara at Negapatam. The vihara was called Cudamani 
vihara after the father of the ruler of Sri Vijaya. 

Rajendra I was a worthy son of his father, and raised the 
Chola empire to the position of being the most extensive and 
most respected Hindu state of his time. Early in his reign 
(1018) he installed his son Rajadhiraja I as yuvaraja. He invaded 
Ceylon and completed the conquest of the island begun by his 
father. Mahinda V was taken prisoner and transported to the 
Chola country where he died twelve years later. Thereafter 
his son Kassapa became the centre of Sinhalese resistance against 



174 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

the Tamil power, and after a war of six months in which a great 
number of Tamils were killed by the Sinhalese forces, he made 
himself king of the southern half of the island, Rohana, and ruled 
as Vikramabahu I for twelve years from 1029. 

Rajendra made a triumphal march at the head of his army 
through the Pandya and Kerala countries, and appointed one 
of his sons as viceroy over both with the title Chola-Pandya, 
Madura being the headquarters of the new viceroyalty. About 
1020-1, Rajendra had to turn his attention once more towards 
the Western Chalukya. 

Satyasraya was succeeded in 1008 by his nephew VikramadityaV 
who after a short and uneventful reign was followed by his brother 
Jayasimha II in 1015. Jayasimha had to fight on many fronts. 
The Paramara Bhoja of Malwa, wanting to avenge the fate of 
Munja, invaded the Chalukya kingdom from the north and 
for some years occupied Lata and portions of Konkan. After 
hard fighting Jayasimha succeeded with the aid of his loyal 
feudatories in recovering the territory occupied by Bhoja. But 
it was the Chola Rajendra who was his most formidable enemy. 
Soon after his accession, Jayasimha tried to retrieve the losses 
sustained in the wars of Satyasraya and for a time circumstances 
seemed to favour him, Rajendra being busy with the conquest of 
Ceylon and the settlement of Pandya and Kerala. In Vengi, 
Vimaladitya, who had succeeded his brother Saktivarman I in 
101 1, either retired from the throne or died in 1018. Jayasimha 
II supported the claims of Vijayaditya VII to succeed him 
against those of Rajaraja, another of Vimaladitya’s sons by his 
Chola queen Kundavai. In the pursuit of this plan Jayasimha 
crossed the Tungabhadra and occupied Bellary and possibly even 
a part of Gangavadi. In Vengi, Vijayaditya captured Vijayavada 
(Bezwada) and made it impossible for his rival Rajaraja to celebrate 
his coronation. But then Rajendra soon turned his attention 
actively against Jayasimha and put two forces simultaneously in 
the field, one marching into the Raichur doab and the other into 
Vengi for the relief of Rajaraja. In the west Jayasimha was 
defeated in a battle at Maski, but this led to no further aggression 
on the part of Rajendra, the Tungabhadra being recognized 
tacitly as the boundary between the two kingdoms. In Vengi the 
Chola forces defeated Vijayaditya in several battles, took possession 
of the country on behalf of Rajaraja and proceeded farther north 





THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 175 

into Kalinga, probably because the Eastern Ganga ruler of that 
country, Madhukamamava (1019-38), had sided with Jayasimha. 
After punishing him the army went still farther north for a grand 
military display in the form of an expedition to the valley of the 
Ganges. But with the departure of the Chola army to the north, 
trouble broke out in the rear and threatened its communications. 
To meet the situation Rajendra I marched towards the north and 
encamped on the banks of the Godavari. He tried to secure the 
line of return for his army which had advanced to the Ganges, 
and celebrated the coronation of his nephew Rajaraja with due 
pomp on 16 August 1022. The victorious army from the north 
joined him soon after, and he returned to the new capital that was 
rising in the wilds of the Trichinopoly district — Gangaikondasola- 
puram. 

Very soon after, Rajendra sent a large naval expedition against 
the kingdom of Sri Vijaya. Sri Vijaya was the powerful maritime 
state which ruled the Malayan peninsula, Sumatra, Java and the 
neighbouring islands and controlled the sea routes from India to 
China. The relations between Sri Vijaya and the Chola empire 
had been quite friendly in the time of Rajaraja and in the early 
years of Rajendra’s reign. The Chola monarchs sent embassies, 
partly diplomatic and partly commercial, to China which reached 
that country in 1016, 1033, and 1077. Rajendra’s war against 
Sri Vijaya (1025) occurred between the dates of the first and second 
embassies to China. Whether it was rendered necessary by an 
attempt on the Sri Vijaya’s part to obstruct the Chola inter- 
course with China or was simply the result of Rajendra’s desire 
to win glory by extending his digvijaya to the countries across the 
sea, we cannot say. Whatever the reason, the expedition was a 
complete success. Kadaram (Kataha) and the capital Sri Vijaya 
itself were sacked and king Sangrama Vijayottungavarman, 
Mara Vijayottungavarman’s successor, was taken captive. The 
campaign apparently ended with the restoration of the kingdom 
to its ruler subject to his acknowledging Chola suzerainty. A 
fragmentary Tamil inscription from Sumatra bearing the date 
1088 shows that active intercourse between the Chola kingdom 
and Sri Vijaya was maintained continuously for several generations. 

Rebellions in the Pandya and Kerala kingdoms called for strong 
action in the course of a fairly extensive campaign conducted by 
the yuvaraja Rajadhiraja, and several princes of the two rebel 



176 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

royal families were either put to death or forced to seek refuge 
in flight. There was trouble in Ceylon also, where Vikramabahu 
kept up the war against the Tamils, and forced Rajadhiraja to 
lead an expedition against him in 1041. After Vikramabahu’s 
death, which occurred about that time, anarchy supervened outside 
the Chola province, and Sinhalese adventurers and dispossessed 
Indian princes from the Pandyan country and a certain Jagatl- 
pala from distant Kanauj asserted authority over portions of the 
island. They all had this in common however, that they led 
risings against the Chola power and suffered for it. 

In the closing years of Rajendra’s reign war broke out once 
more with the Western Chalukyas and the affairs of Vengi were, 
as usual, involved in it. In the Chalukyan kingdom Jayasimha II 
was succeeded by his son, Somesvara I Ahavamalla (1042). He 
removed the capital from Manyakheta to Kalyani, adorning it 
with many new buildings and generally adding to the amenities 
of the new capital. He continued the war begun by his father 
against the Bhoja of Malwa, and received his submission after a raid 
on his capital Dhara. He extended his power along the southern 
districts of the modem Madhya Pradesh, into Kosala and Kalinga, 
and imposed his sovereignty on the Nagavamsi ruler Dharavarsha 
of Cakrakuta. It deserves to be noted that the Kakatlya chieftain 
Prola I and his son Beta assisted Somesvara in his wars, and 
received from him as fief the Anumakonda Vishaya. In another 
direction Somesvara attacked Vengi and thus challenged the 
Chola power. In Vengi Rajaraja had no peace after his coronation 
in 1022. His half-brother Vijayaditya renewed his struggle for the 
throne, perhaps with the aid of Chalukya Jayasimha II, drove 
Rajaraja out of Vengi, and made himself king (1031) with the title 
Vishnuvardhana Vijayaditya VII ; but by 1035 Rajaraja had regain- 
ed his kingdom. Vijayaditya sought refuge in the Western 
Chalukya court where he was received with open arms and enter- 
tained royally. Someivara’s invasion of Vengi was undertaken 
ostensibly in furtherance of the claims of Vijayaditya and news 
of it quickly reached Rajendra I. The king was too old to take the 
field himself, his son Rajadhiraja was engaged in the south, so 
a trusted Brahmin general, assisted by three able lieutenants, was 
ordered to go to Rajaraja’s relief. The Chola army engaged the 
enemy in a sanguinary but indecisive battle at Kalidindi. Mean- 
while Rajendra I died and was succeeded by Rajadhiraja I (1044). 




THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 177 

He was eager to restore Chola power in Vengi, and himself led an 
expedition into the Telugu country soon after he ascended the 
throne. He defeated the Western Chalukya forces in a battle at 
Dannada (Dhanyakataka) on the Krishna and compelled Vikra- 
maditya, Somesvara’s son, and Vijayaditya, Rajaraja’s rival, to 
retreat in disorder. He then entered Western Chalukyan territory 
and set fire to the important fort of Kollipakkai (Kulpak). These 
successes enabled Rajaraja to breathe freely for a time. They 
were followed by campaigns on the western front where the 
Chola forces captured several generals and feudatories of the 
Chalukyas, demolished the Chalukya palace in the city of Kampili, 
and inflicted a defeat on the enemy in a pitched battle at Pundur 
on the banks of the Krishna. Crossing that river, the victorious 
camp of the Chola was fixed at Yetagiri (Yadgir), where a pillar of 
victory with the tiger emblem on it was planted. After more 
fighting, the Chalukya capital Kalyani was itself sacked, and 
Rajadhiraja performed the virdbhisheka (coronation of victor) 
in the enemy capital and assumed the title ‘Vijayarajendra’. A 
fine image of a dvarapalaka at Darasuram (Tanjore district) bears 
the Tamil inscription: ‘the dvarapalaka brought by Udaiyar 
Sri Vijayarajendradeva after burning Kalyanapuram’. 

Before 1050, SomeSvara succeeded in driving the Chola forces 
out of his territory. He also re-established his influence in Vengi 
and compelled Rajaraja to acknowledge his suzerainty in the place 
of that of the Cholas. Lastly, he sent a counter-expedition into 
Chola territory which returned after making a dash against Kanchi. 
These successes were only spurs to further effort on the part of 
Rajadhiraja, although, for reasons not now clear, he did not' make 
any attempt to recover Vengi or Kalinga' where SomeSvara had 
established himself. Rajadhiraja, assisted by his younger brother 
and yuvardja Rajendra II, led another expedition against Somei- 
vara (1053-4) an< J a battle was fought at Koppam (Kopbal), a 
place of great natural strength on the river Krishna. It was hotly 
contested and Rajadhiraja fell mortally wounded. Rajendra who 
had held himself in reserve then pressed forward and turned the 
defeat into victory. He put several Chalukyan generals to death 
and forced their army to retreat in disorder leaving many 
elephants, horses, camels, and much booty to fall into the hands of 
the Cholas along with several women, including some of the 
queens. Rajendra II crowned himself king on the battlefield and 




178 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

advanced to Kollapura where he planted a pillar of victory 
(jayastavibha) before he returned to his capital, Gangaikonda- 
solapuram. 

Anxious to wipe out the disgrace of Koppam, Somesvara soon 
renewed the war. The death of Rajaraja in Vengi (1061) enabled 
him to put Saktivarman II, the son of Vijayaditya VII, on the 
throne and send a strong force to his assistance under Chamunda- 
raja. He also sent his sons Vikramaditya and J ayasimha into Ganga- 
vadi to invade that part of the Chola territory. Rajendra II met 



under Jananatha of Dhara, a Paramara prince in his service. In 
the west, he sent Vijayaditya to carry the war into the enemy 
country. Vlrarajendra soon returned to the charge as expected. 
The Chalukya forces suffered small defeats in Vengi, but at first 
the Cholas did not have any decided success. In the west, 
Someivara’s forces were defeated with heavy loss on the banks 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 179 

to Vengi whither Vijayaditya had also gone earlier to organize the 
defence on the opposite side. A great battle ensued near Bezwada 
which ended in defeat for the Chalukyas. Virarajendra crossed 
the Krishna and marched into Kalinga, where much fighting 
followed, and in the neighbouring Nagavamsi principality of 
Cakrakuta. There, besides Vijayaditya, and Rajaraja, the son of 
Vajrahastra III, Vikramaditya also took part on the Chalukyan 
side, and pnnce Rajendra, the future Kulottunga I, on that of the 
Cholas. Meanwhile, unable to endure the illness which had pre- 
vented his keeping his martial engagement with Virarajendra, 
Somesvara I met his end and performed parama-yoga by drowning 
himself in the Tungabhadra river at Kuruvatti on 29 March 1068 
Thus departed one of the greatest rulers of the Chalukya line. 
He succeeded in keeping Vengi under his control practically 
throughout his reign and reducing to temporary subjection two 
major powers of Northern India, the Paramaras and Pratlharas 
In spite of many reverses he maintained the wearisome struggle 
with the Cholas with undiminished vigour to the end of his life. 
He was greater as diplomat than as warrior, else he could not have 
succeeded in making his influence felt by so many states and for so 
long, and that with a military record none too bright. He had 
great faith in himself and succeeded in imparting it to his many able 
generals, including his famous son Vikramaditya. He was not 
unmindful of the arts of peace; the noble city of Kalyani was his 
creation. 

Somesvara I was succeeded by his eldest son of the same name 
but the ambition of his younger brother Vikramaditya began to 
assert itself almost from the beginning. Hardly had Somesvara II 
come to the throne than Virarajendra led a vigorous attack against 
him, laid siege to Gutti and attacked Kampili. Vikramaditya 
turned the troubles of his brother into his opportunity. He 
seduced his feudatories from loyalty to their lawful monarch 
mid with their aid entered into negotiations with Virarajendra.’ 

I he result was a total revolution in the diplomatic relations among 
the states and a virtual partition of the Chalukyan kingdom 
Vijayaditya made his submission to Virarajendra and consented 
to rule the Vengi kingdom as his feudatory. Two of VIrarajendra’s 
daughters were given in marriage, one to Vikramaditya himself 
and the other to the Kalinga Ganga prince Rajaraja; and within the 
Chalukyan kingdom Vikramaditya VI was installed as yuvaraja 



180 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

with almost independent rule over the southern half of the empire. 
Thus it looked as if the eternal feud between the Cholas and the 
Chalukyas had at last come to an end. 

But the death of Virarajendra early in 1070 altered the situation. 
But before explaining this we must mention some events of the 
reign of Virarajendra. Some time before 1067 he sent an expedi- 
tion against Ceylon, where the Sinhalese king Vijayabahu I 
was making a strong effort to put an end to the Chola power on the 
island. Vijayabahu was defeated and his queen taken captive, 
he himself being forced to seek shelter at Vatagiri (Wakirigala in 
Regalia district). We shall see that better success attended 
Vijayabahu within the next few years. Virarajendra also sent 
another naval expedition for the conquest of Kadaram on behalf of 
a prince who had come in search of his aid and protection (1068). 

After the death of Virarajendra, Vikramaditya found his 
Chola alliance no longer an asset but a liability. He had to divide 
his attention between the pursuit of his differences with his brother 
at home and the protection and maintenance of his young brother- 
in-law Adhirajendra on the Chola throne against the designs of 
the Eastern Chalukya prince Rajendra (Kulottunga I). The 
intermarriages between the Eastern Chalukya and Chola families 
and the position of Rajendra Kulottunga in both may be seen 
from the following table: 


Rajendra II Ammangadevi m. Rajaraja Narendra 

Madhurantaki m. Rajendra II (Chalukya) Vijayaditya VII 

(Kulottunga I) [ 

Saktivarman II 


The bestowal of the Vengi kingdom on Vijayaditya VII by 
Virarajendra had kept Rajendra (Kulottunga) out of the throne 
that was rightfully his, and that able prince naturally took advantage 
of the death of Virarajendra to press his claims both to Vengi 
and to the Chola throne. Vikramaditya proceeded to Kanchi, 
nipped a rebellion in the bud, installed Adhirajendra formally on 





continued to undermine the position of his brother Somesvara 
by inducing the feudatories of the empire to desert his cause. 
Among them were, besides his younger brother Jayasimha, and 
Vijayaditya, who were already on his side, the Kadamba ruler 
Jayakesi of Konkan, Vinayaditya and his son Ereyanga of the 
Hoysala family just coming into prominence, the Pandya ruler of 
Uccangi and even the distant Yadava ruler Seuna II of Devagiri. 
Somesvara had a difficult time, but he did his best with the support 
of a few loyal lieutenants to maintain himself at the head of the 
state and entered into an alliance with Kulottunga I. The prepa- 
rations on both sides, military and diplomatic, were completed 
by about 1075 when the war began with a clash at Nangili in the 
Kolar district between the forces of Vikramaditya and Kulottunga. 
Vikramaditya was defeated and pursued by the Cholas up to 
the Tungabhadra with heavy fighting all the way. Kulottunga 
made himself the master of Gangavadi. But Somesvara who 
co-operated with Kulottunga by attacking Vikramaditya’s rear 
was the worst sufferer. He fell into the hands of Vikramaditya 
who threw him into prison, proclaimed himself king (1076) and 
started a new era — the Chalukya-Vikrama era — to commemorate 


his accession. 


While Kulottunga was engaged in the war with Vikramaditya, 
the kingdom of Vengi was raided in 1072-3 by Yasahkarnadeva, the 
Haihaya ruler of Tripuri. This, however, was an episode with 
no permanent results, military or political, although in another 
direction Kulottunga sustained a permanent loss of territory. 
In Ceylon Vijayabahu resumed his efforts to rid the island 
of its Tamil rulers and succeeded. From the extreme south of the 
island he put three armies in the field all of which advanced 







182 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

simultaneously. Polonnaruva fell, and Anuradhapura surrendered 
in about 1070. Vijayabahu’s coronation as monarch of Lanka, 
which was delayed by a rebellion, took place in 1072-3. Kulot- 
tunga had to reconcile himself to the loss, and Vikramaditya hailed 
Vijayabahu as his natural ally and sent him a friendly embassy 
with rich presents. 

Kulottunga could not afford to neglect the revolt of the Pandya 
and Kerala countries on the mainland. He led a strong expedition 
to the south, and after some hard-fought battles at Semponmari, 
Kottaru, Vilinam, and Salai he subjected the whole country 
once more and compelled the numerous Pandya and Kerala 
princes who had opposed him to acknowledge his supremacy. He 
established a number of military colonies along the important 
routes of communication in both countries, but the old admini- 
strative arrangements of Rajaraja I and Rajendra were not revived 
and the local rulers were left in charge of internal affairs. About 
1084-5 Vijayabahu of Ceylon declared war on the Cholas when he 
heard that the envoys he had sent to Vikramaditya VI had been 
mutilated. While he was preparing the expedition, the velaikkdra 
mercenaries, ‘unwilling to fight their Tamil kinsmen, mutinied, 
and burnt the royal palace. The king fled to Wakirigala, but 
returning crushed the insurrection, the ringleaders being burnt 
at the funeral pyre of the royal generals whom they murdered. 
The velaikkdra forces learnt the lesson, and at the end of the 
reign set up the fine Tamil stone inscription still extant at Polon- 
naruva in which is recorded their agreement to protect the 
Tooth Relic temple.’ 1 Kulottunga apparently made his peace 
with Vijayabahu, for one of his daughters, Suryavalli, married 
Vlrapperumal, the Sinhalese prince. 

A Chola embassy of seventy-two merchants reached China in 
1077 and received ‘81,800 strings of copper cash, that is, about as 
many dollars in return for the articles of tribute comprising glass- 
ware, camphor, brocades, rhinoceros horns, ivory, incense, rose 
water, putchuck, asafoetida, borax, cloves, etc.’ There was 
active trade with Sri Vijaya during this period, so much so that 
in 1090 its king sent an embassy to Kulottunga I to consult about 
the regulation of the affairs of the two vihdras his ancestors had 
erected at Negapatam. 


Codrington, p. 57. 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 183 

After the death of Vijayaditya VII (1076) Kulottunga sent his 
sons to rule as viceroys in Vengi: Rajaraja Mummudi Chola 
(1076-8), VIra Choda (1078-84), Rajaraja Chodaganga (1084-9), 
VIra Choda again (1089-92), and lastly, Vikrama Chola (1092- 
11 18). About 1097 the chieftain of Kolanu entered into a league 
with Anantavarman Choda Ganga of Kalinga and rebelled against 
the viceroy. Among those who assisted Vikrama Chola was 
Parantaka Pandya from the extreme south. Kolanu was sacked, 
and southern Kalinga invaded. The rebel chieftain made his 
submission, and Anantavarman himself had to follow suit. 
Some years later, about mo, Anantavarman Choda Ganga 
withheld tribute and brought about a second Chola invasion of 
Kalinga. This was led by the famous general of Kulottunga, 
Karunakara Tondaiman. The invading army spread destruction 
throughout Kalinga and defeated Anantavarman, who had to seek 
safety in flight. The victorious Chola army returned with vast 
booty but the campaign was devoid of any permanent results, 
though it formed the subject of a celebrated poem, Kalingat- 
tupparani of Jayangondar. 

Up to 1 1 1 5 the extent of the Chola empire remained undimi- 
nished under Kulottunga, except for the loss of Ceylon, and in- 
cluded the entire country south of the Krishna and Tungabhadra, 
extending at least up to the Godavari on the east coast. The 
emperor maintained diplomatic relations with distant kingdoms 
like Kanauj in Northern India, Kambhoja (Cambodia) in Indo- 
China, and with Kyanzittha (1084-1112), the ruler of Pagan. 
But towards the end of his reign troubles arose in the Mysore 
and Vengi countries owing to the renewal of the hostility of 
Chalukya Vikramaditya to whom we must now turn our 
attention. 

After the accession of Vikramaditya, he as well as his great 
antagonist Kulottunga recognized their limitations, and suspended 
active hostilities against each other. Vikramaditya’s reign was, in 
general, peaceful and his court was adorned by learned poets and 
authors like Bilhana and Vijnane^vara. About 1083, however, 
his younger brother Jayasimha rebelled but was defeated in a 
hard-fought battle and taken prisoner. Jayasimha had appealed 
to Kulottunga for help but in vain. 

More serious danger threatened Vikramaditya from the 
Hoysalas. Hoysala Vinayaditya and his son Ereyanga, as we have 




and much more actively after 1 1 18 when, at the instance of Kulot- 
tunga, Vikrama Chola left Vengi for the Chola country as ymiardja. 
In 1118, Anantapala, Vikramaditya’s famous general, is described 
as ruler of Vengi, other Chalukyan commanders are found estab- 
lish ed in other parts of the Telugu country, and the Chola power 
pra ctically disappears for a number of years thereafter. 

Thus Kulottunga sustained another curtailment of his empire 
whi ch by the end of his reign was practically confined to the Tamil 
country and a relatively small area of the adjoining Telugu 
districts. All the same Kulottunga must take rank among the 






THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 185 

great Chola monarchs. His long reign was, for the best part, 
characterized by unparallelled success and prosperity. He 
avoided unnecessary wars, and the permanent results of his 
policy appeared under his successors. Until the end of Kulottunga 
Ill’s reign (1216), for about a century, the empire, though not so 
extensive as in the eleventh century, held well together, and there 
was on the whole less of the chronic warfare of the period before 
the accession of Kulottunga I. The wisdom of Kulottunga’s 
statesmanship lay in adjusting his aims to his resources and in 
preferring the well-being of his subjects to the satisfaction of his 
personal vanity. Tradition and epigraphy alike give him the 
title Sung am tavirtta' (He who abolished the tolls), but there is 
no account of the nature and scope of this reform. 

Vikrama Chola dates his rule from 1118 though his father 
Kulottunga I continued to live four years longer. The seventeen 
years of his reign were on the whole a period of peace. He made 
extensive additions to the temple at Chidambaram to which the 
Chola monarchs were particularly attached — at least from the days 
of Parantaka I — and to the shrine of Ranganatha at Srlrangam. 
The death of Chalukya Vikramaditya VI (1126) and the accession 
of his son, the mild Somesvara III, enabled Vikrama Chola to re- 
establish Chola power in Vengi. It was a gradual process which 
began about 1127 and reached its completion in a battle on the 
banks of the Godavari about 1 133 at which Somesvara was present. 
Fighting on the Chola side, Velananti Choda Gonka II routed the 
army of the Western Chalukyas and their Eastern Ganga ally 
Anantavarman Choda Ganga, taking captive some prominent 
generals and capturing much booty in gold, horses, and camels. In 
Gangavadi Vikrama Chola’s attempt to restore Chola power was 
not so successful, though he did recover parts of the Kolar district. 

He was followed on the throne by his son Kulottunga II who 
was formally installed in 1133. He had a peaceful reign till 1150 
and associated his son Rajaraja II with the actual conduct of the 
administration from 1146. Kulottunga II continued the reno- 
vation and extension of the temple at Chidambaram begun by 
his father and in the course of this work he removed the image 
of Govindaraja from the courtyard of the Nataraja shrine and cast 
it into the sea. Ramanuja is said to have recovered it and 
enshrined it at Tirupati. It was restored to its original place long 
after by Ramaraya of Vijayanagar. 



HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


Rajaraja II ruled generally in peace till about 1173. Having 
son, he chose Rajadhiraja II, the grandson of Vikrama Chola 
a daughter, for the succession and appointed him yuvaraja 
1166. Rajaraja II’s empire extended over the whole of the 


administrative system was beginning to betray signs of weakness. 
Everywhere feudatory chieftains were becoming more and more 


Soon after the installation of Rajadhiraja II, a fierce succession 
dispute in the Pandya country led to the intervention of the Chola 
and Sinhalese rulers on opposite sides which brought no good to 
either. Out of the ashes of this civil war arose the Pandya power 
which in its renewed strength soon swallowed both the Chola and 
Ceylonese kingdoms. After the conquest of the Pandya country 
by Kulottunga I, the princes of the local royal family were allowed 
to rule as they liked, subject to the vague suzerainty of the Cholas. 
Parantaka Pandya, as we have seen, took part in the first Kalinga 
war of Vikrama Chola. But hardly any Chola inscriptions are 
found in the Pandya country after the reign of Kulottunga I. 
About 1166, Parakrama Pandya of Madura and Kulasekhara 
quarrelled about the succession, and Kulasekhara invested the 
city of Madura. Parakrama appealed to Parakramabahu I 
(1153-86) of Ceylon, but before aid could reach him from Ceylon, 
Kulasekhara took Madura and killed Parakrama, his queen and 
some of his children. In spite of this, Parakramabahu sent word 
to his general Lankapura that he should continue the war until the 
kingdom of Madura was taken and bestowed on a prince of the 
house of Parakrama Pandya. Kulasekhara put up a brave resist- 
ance: the war was so protracted that Lankapura had to get rein- 
forcements from Ceylon. Kulasekhara then appealed to the Chola 




THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 187 

commanders, including that of Lankapura, were nailed to the 
gates of the city, in literal fulfilment of the orders of the Chola 
monarch. Kulasekhara re-entered Madura, and the conversion 
of the Pandyan country into a province of Ceylon was thus 

Hearing that Parakramabahu was preparing another attack 
on the mainland, Pallavaraya espoused the cause of Srlvallabha, 
a nephew of Parakramabahu and a rival claimant to the throne of 
Ceylon. An expedition was sent with Srivallabha at its head and 
many places in Ceylon were captured and destroyed. Seeing 
that his attempt to support the line of Parakrama Pandya had 
brought on him nothing but disaster, Parakramabahu now recog- 
nized Kulasekhara as the rightful king, and entered into an 
alliance with him against the Cholas. Kulasekhara’s treachery 
was discovered by the capture of Parakramabahu’s letters and 
presents. The Chola policy at once changed. After further 
fighting, some of which took place in Chola territory proper, 
Pallavaraya set up Vira Pandya on the throne of Madura and 
drove Kulasekhara into exile. Thus Parakramabahu’s designs 
were frustrated and his candidates steadily kept out of the throne 
of Madura. All these events may be placed between 1169 and 
1177 but that date by no means fixes the end of the struggle. 

The growing independence of the central power on the part 
of feudatories noticed in the reign of Rajaraja II became more 
pronounced under Rajadhiraja. The Sambuvaraya, Kadavaraya, 
Malaiyaman chieftains and the Telugu-Chodas of Nellore were 
making wars and alliances among themselves in the northern half 
of the Chola kingdom without any reference to the ruling monarch. 

Rajadhiraja II’s successor was Kulottunga III whose exact 
relationship to the main line is not clear. He began his reign in 
July 1178, though Rajadhiraja lived up to 1182. By his personal 
ability, Kulottunga delayed the disruption of the Chola empire for 
about a generation, and his reign marks the last great epoch in 
the history of Chola architecture and art as he himself is the last 
of the great Chola monarchs. 

Pandya affairs first claimed his attention. The tireless 
Parakramabahu renewed his efforts against the Cholas and even 
persuaded Vira Pandya to make common cause with him, and 
the ruler of Venad also probably joined the combination. A 
certain Vikrama Pandya, perhaps some relation of Kulasekhara, 


188 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

who must have died in the interval, sought Kulottunga’s help 
against Vira Pandya. There followed an invasion of the Pandya 
kingdom as a result of which the Pandya and Sinhalese forces 
were defeated in battle, Vira Pandya being driven into exile, 
and Vikrama Pandya installed on the throne of Madura. This 
campaign must have come to an end before 1182. From his 
exile, with the aid of his allies, Vira Pandya made another effort 
to retrieve his fortune, but the attempt was crushed on the battle- 
field of Nettur. Thence he fled to Ceylon. But there was no 
further fighting as both the ruler of Venad and Vira Pandya 
made up their minds to submit to Kulottunga, and offered obei- 
sance to him in his open durbar at Madura. On the same occasion, 
according to (probably exaggerated) Chola inscriptions, Kulot- 
tunga ‘placed his foot on the crown of the king of Ceylon’. This 
second campaign occurred sometime before A.D. 1189. Vira 
Pandya was treated better than he had a right to expect. His life 
was spared and he was allowed some land and other wealth suited 
to his new station. 

After the second Pandya war, Kulottunga undertook a cam- 
paign in Kongu to check the growth of Hoysala power in that 
quarter. He re-established Chola suzerainty over the Adigaimans 
of Tagadur, defeated a Chera ruler in battle, and performed a 
vijayabhisheka in Karuvur ( 1 193). His relations with the Hoysala 
Ballala II seem to have become friendly afterwards, for Ballala 
married a Chola princess. 

Some time later Jatavarman Kulasekhara, who came to the 
Pandyan throne after Vikrama Pandya in 1190, provoked Kulot- 
tunga by his insubordination. About 1205 Kulottunga led a third 
expedition into the Pandya country, sacked the capital and demo- 
lished the coronation hall of the Pandyas — conduct which may be 
taken to prove Kulottunga’s consciousness of the increasing 
weakness of his own position. As the war ended with the resto- 
ration of Kulasekhara, the success of Kulottunga was by no means 
complete and the seed was sown for a war of revenge. 

Kulottunga waged other wars in the north before the Pandya 
war of reprisal overwhelmed him towards the close of his reign 
and the situation was saved to some extent by the intervention 
of the Hoysalas. These events can only be understood in the light 
of occurrences outside the Chola empire. 

To begin with the Western Chalukyasof Kalyani, Someivara III 







THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 189 

was a peaceful monarch and in his reign Hoysala Vishnuvardhana 
not only threw off his allegiance to the Chalukyan power, but 
sought to extend his dominions at their expense, particularly in 
the regions of Nolambavadi, Banavasi and Hangal. Vishnuvard- 
hana continued his aggression in the reigns of the two sons of 
Somesvara III, Jagadekamalla II (1138-51) and his younger 
brother Taila III (1150-6). By 1149 Vishnuvardhana stationed 
himself at Bankapura in Dharwar and left his son Narasimha in 
charge of his capital Dvarasamudra. The Chalukva empire was 
beginning to dissolve, although its trappings continued intact and 
even the Hoysalas occasionally paid nominal allegiance to the 
emperor, not to speak of the Kalacuris who had held a fief in 
T ardavadi in the heart of the empire from the time of Somesvara III. 
So also the Kakatlyas, who had received the district of Sabbi 1000 
from Vikramaditya VI, and were making other additions to their 
original fief of Anumakonda; and the Yadavas of Devagiri who 
had been generally loyal to the Chalukyas from the days of Taila II. 
Taila III was a feeble and incompetent ruler, and the Kalacuri 
chieftain Bijjala of Tardavadi won his confidence and arrogated to 
himself more and more power in quick stages. By 1157 Bijjala 
assumed imperial titles and a new era may be said to have started ; 
but almost to the end of his reign Taila continued to retain his 
nominal suzerainty which even powerful monarchs like Hoysala 
Narasimha I acknowledged, though fitfully. Taila waged war 
against the Kakatiya Prola II and attacked the city of Anumakonda, 
but Prola captured him and only released him out of loyalty and 
mercy. The hostilities, however, outlasted the reign of Prola, 
and Taila is said to have died of ‘dysentery caused by his fear of 
Rudra’, the son of Prola (1163). 

The Kalacuri revolution now ran its course and Bijjala set up 
rule in the Chalukya capital. He attacked Hoysala Narasimha I 
and took Banavasi. He was still ruling in 1 168 although a certain 
Jagadekamalla III was also ruling with full imperial titles at the 
same time. According to some doubtful legends Bijjala lost his 
life on account of the hostility of the newly risen sect of Lingayats 
whom he persecuted. Three of his sons ruled in quick succession 
up to 1183, but none of them had the ability to turn Bijjala’s 
usurpation to good account, though they continued to war against 
the Hoysalas under Ballala II (1173-1220), son of Narasimha 
I, and met with some initial successes. In 1183 Somesvara IV, 



Shillama (1187-91) 
was the first to realize the utter weakness of Somesvara’s position, 
and take advantage of it. He invaded the Chalukya kingdom and 
seized its northern districts before 1189. But the Yadavas, like 
the Kalacuris, experienced difficulty in gaining recognition as an 
imperial power from those who had stood to the Chalukyas in the 
same relation as themselves. The Rattas, Silaharas, and Kadam- 
bas never gave them their allegiance, and the Hoysalas were stimu- 
lated to a fresh effort by the example of the Yadavas. Bhillama 
spent some years in the south organizing his new conquests. 
His pressure compelled Somesvara and his general Brahma to shift 
their headquarters to Banavasi. Kalyani passed into the hands 
of the Yadavas. Meanwhile Ballala II struck a blow on his own 
account and defeated Somesvara and Brahma in a series of battles, 
the last of which occurred in 1 190. That was the end of the Cha- 
lukyas. Somesvara continued to live in obscurity for less than a 
decade. There naturally ensued a contest between Ballala II 
and Bhillama for possession of the empire. Several battles were 
fought and in the final engagement near Soratur and Lakkundi 
near Gadag, Bhillama was killed (1191), and Ballala advanced the 
northern frontier of his empire to the Malaprabha and the Krishna 
rivers, while the Yadavas retained most of the territory that lay 
further north. Bhillama founded the city of Devagiri and made it 
his capital. The Kakatiyas also gained some territory as a result of 
the final dissolution of Chalukyan hegemony. 

Ballala II was not left in undisturbed possession of his northern 
conquests. Bhillama was succeeded by his son Jaitugi who 
declared war against Kakatiya Rudra, killed him and took his 
nephew Ganapati captive (rr96). Rudra was followed by his 
younger brother Mahadeva on the Kakatiya throne. Mahadeva’s 
short reign was marked by a rebellion and perhaps also by another 
war with the Yadavas. After Mahadeva’s death (ri99), 
Jaitugi released his son Ganapati from prison and set him on the 
throne. Jaitugi’s son and successor Singhana resumed the war 
against the Hoysala soon after his accession (1210) and was assisted 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 191 

by the Kadambas of Konkan and other feudatories who had been 
resisting Ballala already for some years. As a result of Singhana’s 
campaigns, Ballala lost almost all the territory he had gained by his 
wars against Somesvara IV and Bhillama (1216). 

In Vengi, from about the end of the reign of Rajaraja II, the 
Chodas of Velanadu declared their independence. They were 
followed by the Nellore branch of the Telugu-Chodas which 
began with Beta, the feudatory of Vikrama Chola. There is no 
evidence of the rule of Rajadhiraja II in Nellore or the Northern 
Circars. But there was a recovery under Kulottunga III whose 
sway was acknowledged by the Telugu-Choda rulers, Nallasiddha 
and his brother Tammu Siddha, from 1187 to the end of Kulot- 
tunga’s reign. There was, however, an interlude during which 
Nallasiddha occupied Kanchi in 1 192-3 and was driven out of the 
city by Kulottunga III in 1196. The Telugu-Chodas made 
another and a more successful bid for independence towards 
the close of Kulottunga’s reign when he was hard pressed by a 
Pandya invasion of the Chola country, as we shall see in the follow- 
ing chapter. Kulottunga waged war once again in the north in 
1208 when he claims to have subdued Vengi and entered the Kakatiya 
capital, Warangal, perhaps an exaggeration because the Kakatiya 
kingdom was ruled at the time by the powerful monarch Ganapati. 

In this age as in the last the form of government was hereditary 
monarchy. But there was little in common between the simple, 
personal rule of the earlier time and the Byzantine royalty of 
this age with its numerous palaces, officials, and ceremonials, 
and its majestic display of the concentrated resources of extensive 
empires. The coronation was an important and impressive cere- 
mony and the occasion of great liberality. The Chalukyas held 
the ceremony usually at Pattadakal (literally ‘the coronation- 
stone’), the Cholas at different places — Tanjore, Gangaikondas- 
ojapuram, Chidambaram and sometimes Kanchlpuram. Succes- 
sion disputes were not unknown, but generally the rule of succession 
in the eldest male line was respected, and the choice of the yuvaraja 
during the lifetime of the reigning monarch diminished the chances 
of dispute. The murder of Chola Aditya II by his uncle Uttama 
Chola was an extreme and unusual assertion of political ambition, 
viewed with more leniency than it deserved by the ruling king 
Parantaka II and his son Rajaraja I. Vikramaditya VI, whose 
ability was equal to his ambition, trumped up charges of misrule 



192 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

against his elder brother before waging war on him and deposing 
him. Chola Rajaraja I initiated the system of prefacing the 
stone inscriptions of the reign with an account in set terms of its 
chief events kept up to date by additions from time to time. 
The relations between the emperor and his feudatories varied with 
time and circumstance. The administration of the Chola empire 
was stricter and more centralized than that of the Chalukyas, who 
employed a staff of highly trained diplomats ( sandhivigrahis ) to 
serve as liaison officers between the emperor and the feudatories 
in the various parts of the empire. Princes of the royal family 
were often employed as viceroys over important sections of the 

The royal household comprised numerous servants of varied 
descriptions including bodyguards of sorts. The coronation hall 
and kitchen establishments comprised mostly women. The 
palace servants of the Cholas were organized into velatns and 
settled in separate quarters in the capitals. Chau Ju-kua, a 
Chinese author of the early thirteenth century, observed of the 
Chola kingdom: ‘At state banquets both the prince and four 
court ministers salaam at the foot of the throne. Then the 
whole company present break into music, song and dancing. 
He (the prince) does not drink wine but he eats meat, and as is the 
native custom dresses in cotton clothing and eats flour cakes. For 
his table and escorts he employs fully a myriad dancing girls, 
3,000 of whom are in attendance daily in rotation.’ The Chalukya 
palace had a manevergade (chamberlain) and a bhattasavergade 
(steward) besides other officials. The princes of the royal family 
and the nobles all maintained' similar establishments suited to their 
own tastes and means. 

The monarch disposed of business by means of oral orders, but 
an elaborate procedure was observed both before securing them 
and in putting them into execution. The Chola monarch had an 
udankuttam, immediate attendants, a group of ministers represent- 
ing all the chief departments of administration to advise him on 
the disposal of business, besides a chancery ( olai ). There were 
corresponding officials in the Chalukya court. 

The Chola administrative machinery was an elaborate and 
complicated bureaucracy comprising officials of various grades. 
The officials tended to form a separate class in society, organized 
in two ranks, an upper penmdanam and a lower Sirudanam. Offices 



with lower subdivisions in the Chola empire, 
descending order being valanadu or mandalam, 
n. Large townships formed a separate kurram 




THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 195 

by themselves, being known as taniyur or tankurram. Land revenue 
being the mainstay of public finance, great care was bestowed on 
the recording of land rights and revenue dues. All land was 
carefully surveyed and classified into tax-bearing and non-taxable 
lands. In every village and town, the residential part of the 
village (ur nattam), temples, tanks, channels passing through the 
village, the paracceri (pariahs’ hamlet) kammanacceri (artisans’ 
quarters), the burning ground (sudugadu) were exempt from all 
taxes. The total extent of such areas was subtracted from the 
gross area of the village to ascertain the net area of taxable land. 
In its turn, taxable land was classified into different grades accord- 
ing to its natural fertility and the crops raised on it. The existence 
of immunities and exemptions in favour of individuals and institu- 
tions was also carefully noted in the accounts. The village as a 
whole was responsible for the payment of the entire revenue due 
from it to the king’s officers. The process of collection was some- 
times harsh, and villages had reason to complain of their treatment 
by royal officers even in the best days of the Chola empire. When 
central control weakened, local oppression became more un- 
restrained, and instances are known of people from villages in an 
entire district meeting together and deciding upon common action 
to resist arbitrary and unusual imposts. The revenue was collected 
in cash or kind according to convenience. Besides land revenue 
there were tolls on goods in transit, taxes on professions and houses, 
dues levied on ceremonial occasions like marriages, and judicial 
fines. Besides these public dues of a general nature, sections 
of the people often agreed to tax themselves voluntarily for some 
particular object they had in view. 

Justice was administered by regularly constituted royal 
courts in addition to village courts and caste panchayat s. Usage, 
documents and witnesses were admitted as evidence, and where no 
human evidence was forthcoming, trial by ordeal was resorted to ; 
sometimes titles to property were proved by the self-immolation 
of people who were ready to prove the title with their lives. 
Treason ( rdjadroham ) was dealt with by the king himself and 
involved confiscation of property besides death as punishment. 
Fines and imprisonment were the common punishment for ordinary 
crimes, and Chau Ju-kua notes: ‘When any one of the people is 
guilty of an offence one of the court ministers punishes him; 
if the offence is light the culprit is tied to a wooden frame and 





196 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

given fifty, seventy, or up to an hundred blows with a stick. 
Heinous crimes are punished with decapitation or by bemg 
trampled to death by an elephant.’ 

The most striking feature of the Chola period was the unusual 
vigour and efficiency that characterized the functioning of the 
autonomous rural institutions. A highly developed committee 
system for the administration (vdriyams) of local affairs was evolved 
and the sabhd of Uttaramerur which revised its constitutional 
arrangements twice at short intervals in the reign of Parantaka I 
is only the leading example of a number of similar attempts going 
on everywhere to evolve improved methods of administration in 
the light of experience. Besides the staff of village officials engaged 
in the routine affairs of village administration, there were special 
arrangements by which a local chieftain or a powerful official 
undertook to protect life and property in a particular area in 
return for a separate police tax {padikaval kuli) paid to him and 
the need and importance of this system increased with the weaken- 
ing of the central government. 

This sketch of administration in its details has had particular 
reference to the Chola empire, but the conditions elsewhere in 
South India were generally similar though the administrative terms 
differed in the different kingdoms. 

Speaking generally, the medieval polity has the appearance of 
being designed specially for the benefit and comfort of the upper 
ranks of society and would seem to have neglected the common 
man. But the excesses to which the system was liable corrected 
themselves more or less automatically by the social uses to which 
wealth was put. The rich generally sought distinction by compet- 
ing in the service of the gods and of the poor. To build a 
temple, endow a matha and to attach a school or a hospital to 
either, to reclaim land and to promote irrigation, such were the 
most common roads to social eminence and public recognition. 
The king, the nobles and the temples drew largely in various ways 
upon the products of the industry of the common people. But 
much of this wealth was returned to them in ways that advanced 
their common good. It was a wonderful social harmony based not 
on equality of classes or individuals but on a readiness to give and 
take, a mutual goodwill that had its roots deep down at the 
foundations of communal life. 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 


K. A. Nilakanta Sastri: Colas, Vols I and II (Madras, 1935, 1937) 

J. F. Fleet : Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts (Bombay Gazetteer, \ 
Pt. ii, 1896) 

H. W. Codrincton : A Short History of Cey lon (London, 1929) 

F. Hirth and W. W. Rochill: Chauju-Kua (St. Petersburg, 1912) 


Mahadevi m. Irivanolambadiraja 


3. Vikramaditya 4. Ayyana Akkadevi S. Jayasimha II 
1008-15 1015? 1015-42 

6. Someivara I 1042-68 Avalladevi m. Seuna Bhillama III 


13. Someivara IV 1184—1200 



A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


EASTERN CHALUKYAS 
Kubajavishnuvardhana A.D. 624-641 


2. Jayasimha I 641-73 3. Indra Bhittaraka 673 

4. Vishnuvardhana II 673-682 

5. Mangi Yuvaraja 682-706 

6 Jayasimha II 8. Vishnuvardhana III 7. Kokkilji 719 
706-718 719-755 

9. Vijayaditya I 755-72 
10. Vishnuvardhana IV 772-808 

I 


m. 

12. Kali Vishnuvardhana V 
847-849 


Nripa Rudra 


13. Gupaga Vijayaditya III Vikramaditya I Yuddhamalla I 
849-892 ! 

14. Chalukya Bhima I 18. Tala I 927 
892-921 

I 

15. Vijayaditya IV 921 19. VikramaJitya II 

927-8 (11 months) 

21. Yuddhamalla II 928-35 


24. Tala II 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 


199 


EASTERN CHALUKYAS ( continued ) 

15. Viiayaditya IV 921 19. Vikramaditya II I 

| 927-8 (11 months) 

21. Yuddhamalla II 928-35 


Badapa 24. Tala II 

16. Amma 1^921—927 22. Chalukya Bhima II 935-947 


17. Beta Viiayaditya 20. Bhima II 25. Danamava 23. Amma II 
V 927 928 970-73 947-970 

(fortnight) | (with breaks) 

26. Saktivarman I 1000-1011 27. Vimaladityi 101 1-1018 


28. Rajaraja Narendra 1019-1061 29. Vijayaditya VII 


Rajendra II (Kulottunga) 



HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


Aditya I 871-907 
Parantaka I 907-955 


Rajaditya I 947 GandarSditya 949-959 Arifljaya 956-957 

Madhurantaka Uttama Chola Parantaka II 956-973 
970-985 (Sundara Chola) 


Rajarija Mummadi Chola Vira Chola Vikrama Chola 1118-1135 
Kulottunga II 1133-1150 
Rajaraja II U46-1173 



THE BALANCE OF TWO EMPIRES 
RASHTRAKOTAS 


201 


Dantivarman 
Indra I 
Govindaraja I 
Karka I 

I 

Indra II 

1. Dantidurga e. a.d. 752-756 

Reva m. Nandivarman 2. Krishna I 756-775 
Pallavamalla j_ 

Dantivarman Pa llava 3. Govinda il 77S-7S0 4. Dhluva 780-792 

_ I 

I | I I 

Kumba Karka Suvarnavarsha 5. Govinda III 792—814 Indraraja 

6. Amoghavarsha I 814-880 


7. Krishna 1 1 880-915 Abbalabbe Sank ha 

m. Ganga Butuga I m. Pallava 

Nandivarman III 

Lakshml m. Jagattunga m. Govindamba Nripatunga Pallava 

of Cedi I | of Cedi 


8. Indra III 915-27 1 1. Amoghavarsha III 935-939 

9. Amoghavarsha II 10. Govinda IV I 

927-930 930-934/35 | 

I I I 

12. Krishna III 13. Khottiga Nirupma 
939-966 967-972 | 


14. Karka 972-973 


15. Indra IV 



THE AGE OF THE FOUR KINGDOMS 


Ger 
Rajaraja 
Chula n 

and Ball 
Kakatiy 
Ma 


■al outline Pandya revival under Mafavarman Sundara — Chola 

[I aided by Hoysalas against Pandya and Kadava Koppemnjinga— 
.very under Rajendta III shortlived— Jatavarman Sundara Pandya 
ar s — Majavarman KulaSekhara and Hoysalas— Pandya conquest of 
nd of Kulasekhara’s reign — Hoysala Ramanatha, Narasimha III 
a III— Yadava Singhana, Krishna, Mahadeva and Ramachandra— 
Janapati, Rudramba and Prataparudra II — Gangas of Kalinga. 

, Polo on Ma'bar. Kayal, horse-trade, pearl-fishing, and social 


The Chalukya empire disappeared at the end of the twelfth 
century and the Chola at the beginning of the thirteenth. For 
a century thereafter, the history of South India is the history of 
the four kingdoms that rose on the ruins of the vanished empires 
and filled the annals of the century with their mutual antagonisms. 
The kingdoms were the Pandya and the Hoysala in the south, and 
the Kakatiya and Yadava in the north. Minor powers like the 
Telugu-Chodas of Nellore played their part as auxiliaries to 
the chief powers. The period was marked by no striking deve- 
lopments in polity or society although industry, trade and the arts 
continued to flourish with their normal vigour. Marco Polo who 
visited many parts of the country in 1292-3 gives a vivid account of 
prevailing conditions. The Muslim invasions of the Deccan which 
began towards the end of the century upset all the four kingdoms 
and caused a period of confusion terminated by the rise and ex- 
pansion of the Bahmani and Vijayanagar kingdoms early in the 
fourteenth century. 

Jatavarman KulasSekhara, the Pandya ruler whom Kulottunga 
III humiliated in a signal manner in 1205, was followed on the 
throne, more than ten years later, by his younger brother, Mara- 
varman Sundara Pandya (1216). Sundara wanted to avenge the 
wrongs he had shared with his brother and invaded the Chola 
territory soon after his accession. Kulottunga’s age and the 
swiftness of the attack rendered Chola resistance feeble. After 
sacking Uraiyur and Tanjore, Sundara Pandya drove his suzerain 
into exile along with his yuvaraja, Rajaraja III. Sundara per- 
formed a vtrabhisheka in the coronation hall of the Cholas at 


D— 1325 


Sundara Pandya therefore had to make peace and restore the 
Chola kingdom to Kulottunga and Rajaraja after they made formal 
submission at Pon Amaravati and acknowledged him as suzerain. 
This was the beginning of the second empire of the Pandyas 
though it was not yet quite the end of that of the Cholas. 


204 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Kulottunga III died soon after (1218) and Rajaraja III proved 
to be an incompetent ruler under whom confusion increased and 
the dissolution of the Chola kingdom was hastened. In some 
unknown way a company of Odda (Oriya) soldiers penetrated to 
the heart of the Chola country (c. 1223) and created disturbances 
in Srirangam until they were dislodged by Sundara Pandya 
(1225). In the north, Hoysala forces were present in Kanchi, 
perhaps pursuing hostilities with the Telugu-Chodas of Nellore 
and their suzerains, the Kakatlyas. The Kadava chieftain 
Kopperunj inga became more and more powerful and entered into an 
alliance with Sundara Pandya against the Cholas and their Hoysala 
protector. Little realizing the increasing difficulty of his position, 
Rajaraja III defied Sundara Pandya by withholding the annual 
tribute due to him and starting hostilities. Sundara Pandya 
repelled the feeble Chola invasion and took the offensive. Rajaraja 
was defeated with much loss of wealth and his chief queen was. 
taken prisoner. Sundara Pandya performed a vijayabhisheka 
at Mudikondasolapuram (Ayirattali). Rajaraja made an attempt 
to join his allies, the Hoysala forces of Narasimha II in the north, 
but he was intercepted and, after a battle at Teljaru, was taken 
prisoner by the Kadava Kopperunjinga and confined in the fortress 
at Sendamangalam. 

Hearing of the disasters that had befallen the Chola monarch, 
Narasimha II promptly moved to his aid. He attacked and over- 
powered the ruler of the Magara kingdom (Salem and South 
Arcot), an ally of the Kadava, and marched towards Srirangam. 
From there he sent an army under his generals Appanna and 
Goppayya with instructions to carry destruction into the country 
of Kopperunjinga and to reinstall the Chola emperor. The 
generals carried out their instructions to the letter. They 
captured many important places held by Kopperunjinga and, after 
a battle at Perambalur, advanced by way of Toludur to Chidam- 
baram, punishing on the way some officers of Rajaraja and Parak- 
ramabahu, a prince of Ceylon, who had joined the enemy. After 
worshipping the god of Chidambaram, they devastated the 
country south of the river Gadilam and east of Sendamangalam. 
Finally they made preparations to invest that fortress when Kop- 
perunjinga sent word to Narasimha that he was ready to restore 
the Chola emperor to liberty and his throne, and Narasimha 
transmitted the offer to his commanders. They then received the 



THE AGE OF THE FOUR KINGDOMS 205 
Chola emperor with honour and accompanied him back to his 
country (1231). 

Meanwhile Narasimha himself had met Sundara Pandya in 
battle at Mahendramangalam on the Kaveri and defeated him. 
Sundara Pandya had to acquiesce in the restoration of Rajaraja. 
The war with the Kadava went on for some more years, but 
peace was finally made among the Hoysalas, Pandyas, and Cholas 
and sealed by dynastic marriages. Somesvara (1233-4), the son 
and successor of Narasimha II, is called uncle ( mamadi ) by the 
successors of both Sundara Pandya and Rajaraja III. 

Rajaraja continued to rule until 1256, the extent of his empire 
nominally being the same as at the beginning of his reign in spite 
of reverses. But instances of treason, disorder, and alliances for 
mutual defence among local chieftains and of defiance of express 
orders issued by the king were becoming more and more 
numerous, while Hoysala influence over the whole area of the 
Chola kingdom and even in the Pandya country increased steadily 
from about 1220 to 1245, a period which may be well described 
as that of Hoysala hegemony in the south. This was due to 
Somesvara leaving the administration of his home territory in 
the hands of his ministers and devoting all his time to the con- 
solidation of the Hoysala position in the Tamil country. 

Rajendra III, who was installed as yuvaraja in 1246, was a 
much abler prince than Rajaraja III. He made a strenuous effort 
to revive Chola power and would have succeeded even better than 
he did but for Someivara’s interference. Rajendra attacked the 
Pandyas and defeated two Pandyan princes, one of whom was 
Maravarman Sundara Pandya II (1238). Somesvara now took the 
side of the Pandyas to prevent the complete restoration of Chola 
authority, defeated Rajendra in battle and then made peace with 
him. In the north Rajendra commanded the alliance of Choda 
Tikka of Nellore, also called Gandagopala, who had been attacked 
by Somesvara in 1240. Tikka by his wars checked the power of 
the Sambuvarayas and Kadavarayas and thereby strengthened 
that of Rajendra. He even fought against Somesvara though he 
took Kanchi for himself as a reward for his services and had 
another allegiance, namely that to Kakatlya Ganapati of Waran- 
gal, also an enemy of the Hoysalas. 

The alliance between Rajendra and Somesvara became closer 
after the accession to the Pandya throne of the celebrated 




206 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya in 1251, one of the most famous war- 
riors and conquerors of South India under whom Pandyan power 
attained its greatest splendour. In the first years of his reign Sun- 
dara Pandya fought many wars and rapidly extended his sway to 
Nellore and beyond, and to Ceylon, confining the Hoysalas to the 
Mysore plateau. Kanchipuram became a secondary Pandya 
capital, while Ceylon and Kerala were firmly held and administer- 
ed by them for a time. In his wars, Sundara commanded the 
active co-operation of other princes of the royal family, Jata- 
varman Vira Pandya (1253) being most prominent among them. 

Sundara Pandya proceeded with a small force against the Chera 
king Viraravi Udaya Martandavarman, and destroyed him and his 
forces after ravaging the Malainadu. He compelled the warlike 
Chola Rajendra to acknowledge his suzerainty and pay him tribute. 
He invaded Ceylon and exacted a vast quantity of pearls and many 
elephants from its ruler. He then attacked the Hoysalas in the 
region of the Kaveri and captured the fortress of Kannanur 
Koppam. Several Hoysala generals were killed, including the 
brave Singana, while numerous elephants and horses were captured 
together with a large amount of treasure and a number of women. 
Sundara only stopped fighting when Somesvara withdrew into the 
plateau; but shortly afterwards Somesvara renewed the war in 
which he was to meet his death at Sundara Pandya’s hands 
(1262). Sundara then attacked the rich city fortress of Sendaman- 
galam and fought several engagements ‘which struck terror into 
the heart of the Kadava’ (Kopperunjinga). Having thus become 
master of his territory, forces and treasure, Sundara restored him to 
the rulership of his land and left for Chidambaram where he 
worshipped Nataraja before proceeding to Srirangam. ‘Here he 
wore the garland of victory, performed many tulabharas, which 
pleased the eyes and hearts of all spectators and evoked blessings 
from learned poets’ ; and in that temple which he roofed with gold 
he sat upon a splendid throne with his queen, wearing a golden 
crown and ‘emulating the morning sun rising on the top of the 
mountain’. 

Sundara Pandya’s conquests included the Magadai and Kongu 
countries which must have been taken during the wars against 
the Hoysalas and Kopperunjinga. Finally, he led an expedition 
further north in which he killed Gandagopala in battle and occupied 
Kanchi. He also came into conflict with Kakatlya Ganapati and 



THE AGE OF THE FOOR KINGDOMS Z07 
his other feudatories, defeated a Telugu army at Mudugur 
(Nellore district) and drove a Bana chief into exile. At the end of 
the campaign he performed a virabhisheka at Nellore. 

Between 1262 and 1264, on an appeal for help from a minister of 
Ceylon, Jatavarman Vira Pandya invaded the island, defeated and 
killed one Ceylonese prince and received the submission of another 
as also that of a son of Chandrabhanu of the Malay peninsula who 
ruled over a principality in the north of Ceylon. Both the Pandya 
invasions of the island fell in the reign of Parakramabahu II who 
appears never to have gained mastery over the northern half of the 
Island but left its fate to be settled by local adventurers and foreign 
invaders. 

The vast treasure that fell into the hands of Sundara as a result 
of his wars was used to beautify and enrich impartially the great 
shrines of Siva and Vishnu at Chidambaram and Srirangam. 

Sometime before his death, Hoysala Somesvara, being pressed 
by enemies from both north and south, had effected a virtual 
division of his kingdom, assigning the northern half to his elder son 
Narasimha III and the southern Tamil area to his younger son 
Ramanatha. After his father’s death, Ramanatha recovered 
Kannanur and held his own against Sundara Pandya who died 
in 1268 and was succeeded by Maravarman Kulasekhara I, also 
a great ruler. 

During this period the rule of the Pandya kingdom was shared 
among several princes of the royal family, one of them enjoying a 
primacy over the rest. Such an arrangement seems to have been 
of long standing in that country ; even Kulottunga I is said to have 
subjugated five Pandya princes together. Kulasekhara pressed 
the war against Hoysala Ramanatha, who had allied himself 
closely with Chola Rajendra III, and defeated both in 1279. 
That is the last we hear of Rajendra III and the Cholas. Kula- 
sekhara became unquestioned master both of the Chola country and 
of those Tamil districts of the Hoysala empire over which Ramana- 
tha had ruled. He also fought in Travancore where, perhaps, 
he suppressed a local rising. Sometime later he took advantage of a 
famine in Ceylon to send his minister Aryachakravarti to invade 
the island where he ‘laid waste the country on every side’, entered 
the fortress of Subhagiri (Yapahu), and carried away to the Pandya 
country ‘the venerable Tooth Relic and all the solid wealth that was 
there’. This was at the close of the reign of Bhuvanaikabahu I, 



208 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

and there followed a period of some twenty years during which 
the island formed part of the Pandya empire. The next ruler of 
Ceylon Parakramabahu III (1303) adopted persuasive methods 
with Kulasekhara, went on a personal embassy to the Pandya 
court, and persuaded Kulasekhara to surrender the Tooth Relic. 
Ceylon regained her independence only during the civil war and the 
Muslim invasion that followed Kulasekhara’s death (1308-9). 
His last years were embittered by quarrels between his sons. 
He wanted his younger son by a favourite queen, VIra Pandya, 
to succeed him. The result was that the elder son, Sundara 
Pandya, started a war after the death of his father, for which, 
according to some writers, Sundara was himself responsible. 
The war went in favour of Vira Pandya, and Sundara had to invoke 
the aid of the Muslim invader Malik Kafur (1310). 

After the loss of his Tamil territory Hoysala Ramanatha 
started the civil war against his brother Narasimha III who was 
hard pressed by other enemies like the Yadavas of Devagiri 
and the Kakatlyas. Ramanatha succeeded in capturing some terri- 
tory for himself in the Bangalore, Kolar, and Tumkur districts, 
and ruled it with Kundani as his capital. Narasimha III died 
in 1292 and was succeeded by Ballala III. His accession was not 
disputed by Ramanatha who, however, kept up a hostile attitude 
till his death three years later, as did his son ViSvanatha also for a 
few years until he too disappeared from the scene. Ballala thus 
once more ruled over a united Hoysala kingdom before 1300. 
He took advantage of the civil war in the Pandya country that 
followed the death of Kulasekhara, and went out to the aid of one 
or other of the parties in the hope of regaining the territory lost by 
Ramanatha. But his plans were thwarted by the sudden appearance 
of Malik Kafur in his rear. 

To turn now to the northern states, the Yadava Jaitugi was 
succeeded by his son Singhana (1210-47) under whom the Yadava 
empire attained its g eatest extent. He invaded Gujarat twice in 
1231-2 and 1237-8, while in the south he waged war first against 
Hoysala Ballala II and deprived him of considerable territory to the 
south of the Krishnaand Malaprabha. He still kept up the pressure 
against the Hoysalas in the reign of Narasimha II, who had to 
abandon the Sagar taluk and the Bellary district. Narasimha’s 
successor SomeSvara, however, succeeded in leading an 
expedition into the interior of the Yadava kingdom in 1236 



THE AGE OF THE FOUR KINGDOMS 209 
when he managed to reach Pandarpur. Singhana’s general 
VIcana, the governor of the southern province, not only drove 
him back but carried his arms into Hoysala country up to the banks 
of the Kaveri (1239). Indeed, so disastrous were Somesvara’s 
sallies against the Yadavas that by the end of his reign he had lost 
even more territory to them than his predecessors had. Singhana’s 
empire, on the other hand, was extended and established by 
VIcana all over what had been the central, western, and south- 
western regions of the Western Chalukya empire. Singhana also 
waged rather indecisive wars against Kakatlya Ganapati and the 
ruler of Malwa. 

Singhana’s chief astrologer was Changadeva, the grandson of the 
famous astronomer Bhaskaracarya, and son of Lakshmldhara, the 
chief pundit of Jaitugi I. He founded a college at Patna for the 
study of his grandfather’s Siddhantasiromani and other works. 

The Yadava throne descended to Singhana’s grandson Krishna 
(1247-60) — his son Jaitugi II having died in his father’s lifetime. 
Although he lost some territory in the south-western Andhradesh 
to Kakatlya Ganapati, he may be said in general to have passed on 
undiminished the extensive empire he had inherited. His reign is 
chiefly remarkable for its literary activity: his minister and general 
Jalhana compiled an anthology of Sanskrit verse, and Amalananda’s 
Veddntakalpataru also dates from this time. Krishna himself 
seems to have been a religious man who performed many sacrifices. 

Krishna was succeeded by his brother Mahadeva (1260-71). 
He fought successful war against Kakatlya Rudramba, capturing 
her elephants and some of her insignia but sparing her life as she 
was a woman. He invaded northern Konkan, defeated its Silara 
ruler Somesvara in a naval battle and annexed his territory 
to the Yadava empire. The celebrated Hemadri was minister 
( Srikaranadhipa ) under him and his successors. A voluminous 
writer himself, Hemadri encouraged many other writers by his 
patronage, and built so many temples that a style of architecture 
came to be associated with his name. 

Krishna’s son Ramachandra succeeded to the throne in 1271 
after a short war with Amana, the son of Mahadeva, who tried to 
usurp his place. Ramachandra also waged other wars, by no 
means decisive in their results, against the ruler of Malwa and the 
Kakatlya Prataparudra II, Rudramba’s successor. About 1276-7, 
his famous general Saluva Tikkama invaded the Hoysala territory 




210 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

of Narasimha III and laid siege to the capital Dvarasamudra. 
He returned with much booty from a victorious campaign, but 
left Narasimha in full possession of his territory. Narasimha’s 
brother Ramanatha was also attacked but with no decisive results. 
Hostilities against the Hoysalas continued into ihe reign of B allala 
HI, who attempted to extend the kingdom northward, but the 
advance of Muslim power in the Deccan during the last decade of 
this century considerably curbed Ramachandra’s activity. The 
great Maratha saint J nanesvara flourished during his reign and 
completed his great Marathi exposition of the Gita on the banks 
of the Godavari in I29t. 

Turning to the Kakatlyas, perhaps the ruler with most claim to 
greatness was that Ganapati whom Jaitugi had released from prison 
and set on the throne. In his long reign of over sixty years (1199- 
1262) he earned the reputation of being a good administrator. In 
the Andhra country, the power of the Velananti Chodas had 
disappeared after 1186, and its distracted political condition was 
an invitation to a ruler like Ganapati to enter and exploit its 
fertile lands, its iron and diamond mines and its ports. This 
conquest he completed between 1209 and 1214 and made the 
Telugu-Chodas of Nellore acknowledge his suzerainty. Their 
wars with Kulottunga III, after their capture of Kanchi, involved 
him, as we have seen, in hostilities with that monarch also. He also 
fought against Ananga Bhlma III (1211-38) of Kalinga, who was 
hard pressed by his Muslim enemies from the north and by the 
Chedi rulers of Tummana, and in another indecisive war about 
1231 with the Yadava Singhana. More decisive was his defeat 
(1239) of the Kayasthas in Cuddapah and Kumool, represented by 
Gangaya Sahini and his nephews Tripurantaka and Ambadeva. 
Soon after this, Ganapati proclaimed his daughter Rudramba 
heir-apparent, even calling her by the masculine name Rudradeva 
Maharaja, and associated her actively in the administration. He 
also issued a charter of security to foreign merchants trading in 
Motupalli. Jatavarman Sundara Pandya’s aggressive wars, that 
brought him into conflict with the Telugu-Chodas and their 
suzerain Ganapati, have been narrated already. When Sundara 
Pandya withdrew, Ganapati, at the instance of the poet Tikkana, 
assisted Manuma Siddhi, the son of Choda Tikka, against his 
domestic enemies and seated him firmly on the Nellore throne. 
Even that turbulent Kadava chieftain Kopperunjinga acknow- 
ledged Ganapati’s overlordship. 



THE AGE OF THE FOOR KINGDOMS 211 

Ganapati’s daughter Rudramba was his successor. The early 
years of her reign were marked by troubles created by Kopperun- 
jinga and other rebellious feudatories, but these were firmly 
suppressed by the loyal Kayastha chieftain Ambadeva. Yadava 
Mahadeva invaded Rudramba’s kingdom with results already noted. 
The hostility of the Yadavas continued after Mahadeva’s reign, 
and the young prince Prataparudra'deva, grandson of Rudramba, 
won his spurs as a warrior in these conflicts. He was made 
yuvaraja about 1280, and when, eight years later, Ambadeva 
rebelled and got support from the Hoysalas and Yadavas, the 
yuvaraja succeeded in suppressing the revolt by about 1291. 

Prataparudra II succeeded his grandmother in 1295 and ruled 
till 1326. Early in his reign one of his generals led an expedition 
into Kuntala, capturing the forts of Adavani (Adoni) and Raichur, 
among others, after driving out the Yadava garrisons, and brought 
the territory under Kakatiya rule. Prataparudra reformed the 
administrative system by dividing the kingdom into 77 nayakships, 
confining recruitment thereto to the Padmanayaka community and 
thoroughly overhauling the staff of nayakas. Some of the great 
nayakas, like Kapayanayaka, who later played agreat part in resisting 
the Muslims, were the products of this system which, incidentally, 
was later adopted and elaborated by the rulers of Vijayanagar. 

Throughout the thirteenth century, and later, the Gangas 
continued to rule the kingdom of Kalinga. In the reign of 
RajarajaIII(ii98-i2ii), grandson of Anantavarman Choda Ganga, 
occurred the first Muslim invasion of Orissa. The army sent by 
Bhaktyar Khalji (1205) against Jajnagar was successfully repulsed. 
Similar results attended another effort against Orissa by the Bengal 
Muslims between 1211 and 1224 in the reign of Rajaraja’s 
successor Aniyanka Bhlma III. Aniyanka Bhima also fought against 
Kakatiya Ganapati, and his troops went as far afield as Kanchi- 
puram and possibly even Srirangam. His son Narasimha I 
(1238-64) took the offensive against the Muslim rulers of Bengal 
and fought three campaigns against them, though they were not 
uniformly successful. Bhanudeva II (1306-28) was definitely 
defeated by the Tughlak invasion under Ulugh Khan and had to 
surrender a number of elephants to the victor. In his turn, 
Bhanudeva III (1352-78) had to face Firoz Tughlak to whom he 
had to submit as a condition of peace. The last great Ganga ruler 
was Narasimha IV (1378-1414), in whose time the Muslim ruler of 






THE AGE OF THE FOUR KINGDOMS 213 

practice of allowing a condemned criminal who was sentenced to 
death to sacrifice himself to some god or other of his choice. He 
says quaintly: ‘And let me tell you the people of this country have 
a custom of rubbing their houses all over with cowdung. More- 
over all of them, great and small, king and barons included, do sit 
upon the ground only. ... It is their practice that everyone, male 
and female, do wash the body twice every day ; and those who do 
not wash are looked on much as we look on the Patarins. You must 
know that in eating, they use the right hand only. ... So also they 
drink only from drinking vessels, and every man hath his own; 
nor will anyone drink from another’s vessel. And when they drink 
they do not put the vessel to the lips but hold it aloft and let the 
drink spout into the mouth. . . . They are very strict in executing 
justice upon criminals and as strict in abstaining from wine. 
Indeed they have made a rule that wine-drinkers and seafaring 
men are never to be accepted as sureties.’ He mentions the 
custom by which a creditor drew a circle round his defaulting 
debtor and ‘the latter must not pass out of this circle until he shall 
have satisfied the claim, or given security for its discharge’. He 
mentions the presence of experts in the arts of physiognomy, 
astrology and sorcery, and the readiness of people to consult them. 
He refers to temples as ‘certain abbeys in which are gods and 
goddesses to whom many young girls are consecrated’ ( devadasis ). 
He notices the widespread use of betel leaves with camphor and 
other aromatic spices mixed with quicklime. He notes that ‘the 
nobles and great folks slept on beds made of very light cane work, 
hanging from the ceiling by cords for fear of tarantulas and other 
vermin; while the common folk slept on the streets’. 

He mentions the richness of Ceylon in precious stones and 
narrates the legends he heard about Adam’s Peak. He records the 
embassy sent to Ceylon in 1284 by Kublai Khan to get from there 
some of the hair and teeth of Adam. He sets down in detail the 
legends narrated to him of St Thomas the Apostle, and the manner 
of his death in the neighbourhood of Mylapore. He knew that 
the Andhra country was ruled by a queen (Rudramba), a lady of 
much discretion, and he describes the different methods by which 
diamonds were gathered from the mines in her kingdom. He 
adds: ‘In this kingdom also are made the best and most delicate 
buckrams and those of the highest price; in short, they look like 
tissue of spider’s web ! There is no king nor queen in the world 



214 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

but might be glad to wear them. The people have also the largest 

sheep in the world, and great abundance of all the necessaries of 

life’. 

He notices the presence of Jews and Christians in the kingdom 
of Quilon and says that the king was tributary to no one. Pepper 
and indigo were abundant in the country which was visited regular- 
ly by merchants from China, Arabia, and the Levant. ‘Com they 
have none but rice. So also their wine they made from (palm-) 
sugar; capital drink it is, and very speedily it makes a man drunk. 
All other necessaries of a man’s life they have in great plenty and 
cheapness.’ 

In the kingdom of Eli (Mount D’Ely), pepper and ginger and 
other spices in quantities were to be had, but any merchant 
ship touching its ports by stress of weather was seized and had 
its cargo plundered. Piracy was rampant throughout the Malabar 
coast. ‘The ships that come from the East bring copper in ballast. 
They also bring hither clothes of silk and gold and sandals; also 
gold and silver, cloves and spikenard, and other fine spices for 
which there is a demand here and exchange them for products 
of these countries.’ 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bhandarkar : Early History of the Dekhan (Bombay Gazetteer. Vol. I Pt. ii, 
1894 

H. W. Codrington : Short History of Ceylon (London, 1929) 

J. F. Flsbt : Dynasties of the Kanarese District ( Bombay Gazetteer, I, ii. 1896) 

K. A. N. SASTRI : Colas Vol. II (Madras, 1936) 

— Foreign Notices of South India (Madras, 1939) 

— The Pandyan Kingdom (London 1929) 



THE AGE OF THE FOUR KINGDOMS 


215 


HOYSALAS (1022-1342) 

1. Nripakama 1022-1047 

2. Vinayaditya 1047-1098 

3. Ereyanga 1063-1100 

i li — 1 j. 

Ballala I 1100-1111 5. Vishnuvardhana 1100-1152 Udayaditya 

6. Narisimhal 1152— 1173 

7. Balllla II 1173-1220 

8. Narasimha II 1220-1238 

9. Someivara 1233-1267 


10. Narasimha III 1254-1292 

11. Ballala III 
1291-1342 

12. Ballala IV 


Raminatha 1254-1295 

Viivanatha 

1295-1300 



216 


HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 


KAKATlYAS 

1. Beta I 1000-1030 

2. Prola I 1030-1075 

I 

3. TribhuvanamaUa Beta II 1075-1110 

4. Prola II 1110-1158 

5. Prataparudra I 6. Mahadeva 

1158-1195 1195-1198 

J 

7. Ganapati 1199-1262 Mailamba 




i. Rudramba 
1262-1296 


Ganapamba 



THE BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 


First Khalji invasion of the Deccan and subjugation of Devagiri — 
subsequent invasions — Malik Kafur — invasion of Hoysala and Pandya 
countries — Hindu reaction — kingdom of Kampili — Pandya civil war and 
Tughlak invasion — end of the Yadava and Kakatiya Kingdoms — rebellion of 
Baha-ud-Din Garshasp and its results -Fall of Kampili — movement for 
liberation— Kapaya Nayaka and Ballala III — Harihara and Bukka — Vidya- 

expansion of Vijayanagar till 1346. 

Foundation of the Bahman! kingdom — Ala-ud-din I Bahman Shah — 
Muhammad I— Mujahid— Daud — Muhammad II — Ghiyas-ud-din— Shams- 
ud-din — Firuz — Ala-ud-din II Ahmad — Humayun — Nizam Shah — Muha- 
mmad III — Mahmud — end of the Bahman! kingdom — nominal rule of the 
four sons of Mahmud. 

The sultanate of Delhi was established towards the close of the 
twelfth century, and for a hundred years thereafter its attention 
was confined to Northern India. The idea of subjugating the 
Deccan and the land beyond began with the Khaljis, although the 
first Muslim attack on a Deccani kingdom was a quasi-private 
enterprise planned in secret and carried out with suddenness. 
The story is that Garshasp Malik, the future Ala-ud-din, nephew 
and son-in-law of Sultan Jalal-ud-din, resented the supercilious 
conduct of his wife towards him and wanted to punish her. Before 
he could do so, however, he had first to gather strength and re- 
sources enough to be able to oppose the sultan and his sons. First 
he obtained the sultan’s permission to lead an expedition against 
Malwa, but in fact went much farther south and advanced rapidly 
against the Yadava kingdom of Devagiri (February 1296) at a 
time when its army was engaged on a distant expedition. The 
reigning king, Ramadeva, was overwhelmed by the swiftness of 
the onslaught, and sued for peace at the end of a week’s siege of 
his capital. He surrendered much treasure and many elephants and 
horses, and even gave one of his daughters in marriage to the 
conqueror. When Sangama, his son, heard of the threat to the 
capital, he hastened back with his army and wanted to resume 
hostilities. By the time he arrived, however, peace had been 
concluded, Ramadeva was in the hands of the enemy, and Sangama 
himself also had to make his submission, at least for the time. 






the South in preference to the extension of his territories. In 
1303-4 he sent an expedition against Warangal by way of Bengal. 
It was led by Malik Fakhr-ud-din Juna (later Muhammad bin 
Tughlak) and ended in failure; the Telugu army met the invader 
before he could reach Warangal, inflicted severe losses on him, 
and compelled him to retreat. This disaster so lowered the pres- 
tige of the sultanate in the Deccan, that Sangama of Devagiri with- 
held the tribute his father had agreed to pay and gave shelter to 
the refugee king of Gujarat and his daughter who had fled their 
country to escape falling into the hands of the sultan’s forces. 
Either out of loyalty to Ala-ud-din or in pursuit of a deeper policy, 
Ramadeva denounced his son, and asked Ala-ud-din to take steps 
to restore his authority before it was too late. An army was sent 
immediately (1307) under the sultan’s favourite slave Malik Kafur: 
Sangama was defeated near Devagiri and fled. Malik Kafur 
plundered the city, took possession of the kingdom in the name of 
his master and carried off Ramadeva and his family as prisoners to 
Delhi. But the sultan treated Ramadeva with great kindness; he 
kept him by his side for six months before sending him back, loaded 
with money and presents, to rule over a kingdom extended by the 
addition of portions of Gujarat. The sultan’s generosity was 
rewarded, for Ramadeva remained loyal to him for the rest of his 
life and gave valuable aid to his forces in their operations in the 
South. 

Late in 1309 Malik Kafur was sent against Warangal to wipe 
out the disgrace of the last defeat sustained by the imperial armies 
at that place. He first proceeded to Devagiri where Ramadeva 
was all attention to his requirements. Thence he crossed the 
Yadava territories and entered the Telugu country, reaching the 
neighbourhood of Warangal by rapid marches early in 1310. The 
siege of the double- walled city lasted a month; the outer fortress 
was taken by storm, and the consequent overcrowding in the inner 



BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 219 
and an annual tribute. Malik Kafur returned to Delhi with the 
booty in June 1310 where he was received with honours by his 
master. 

Early next year, Malik Kafur again set out on another expedi- 
tion to the South, this time against the kingdoms of Dvarasamudra 
and Ma’bar, i.e., the Hoysala and Pandya kingdoms in the far 
South. Devagiri again became the base of operations, where 
Ramadeva was glad to offer help, for the Hoysala ruler, Ballala 
III, was no friend of his, having at one time seized some of his 
territory. Kafur’s army waited to attack the Hoysalas until 
Ballala was away on an expedition in the Pandya country. That 
land was disturbed by quarrels among Kulasekhara’s sons, and 
Ballala hoped to turn the situation to his advantage and to regain 
territory that Kulasekhara had seized some time before. Kafur’s 
advance was therefore practically unchecked and he spread des- 
truction and panic throughout his journey to the Hoysala capital. 
Ballala returned in haste, but saw that resistance was hopeless, and 
overruled his nobles and officers who wanted to fight. He con- 
sented to become a tributary ( zimmi ) to the sultan and to surrender 
his wealth, elephants and horses. 

Kafur spent less than a fortnight in Dvarasamudra, and then 
started towards Ma’bar. Ballala accompanied him and guided 
the army along the difficult mountain routes that led from the 
tableland to the plains. Though divided among themselves, the 
Pandya princes were at one in resisting the invader, harassing him 
incessantly, but avoiding pitched battles and taking care not to shut 
themselves in fortresses that might easily be reduced. Malik 
Kafur first marched against Bir Dhul, the capital of VIra Pandya in 
the neighbourhood of Uraiyur. The king escaped before the city 
fell into the enemy’s hands, and Kafur’s further operations were 
hampered by rains. He braved the weather, however, and pursued 
VIra Pandya who was reported to have fled to Kandur (not identi- 
fied). On the way he seized a convoy of treasure from the backs 
of a hundred and twenty elephants, but even when he reached 
Kandur, and took it, there was no sign of Vira Pandya. He there- 
fore marched to Kanchlpuram (or Marhatpuri to the Muslim 
historians) where he plundered and desecrated the temples before 
returning to Bir Dhul. Thence he planned a sudden descent 
upon Madura, the Pandyas’ main capital, where Sundara Pandya 
■was king; but Sundara was forewarned and abandoned the city, 








BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 221 
lieutenant he had left behind. Harapala Deva, Ramadeva’s son- 
in-law, was thus able to re-establish the Yadava power for a time, 
but soon after his accession, Mubarak Khalji again marched south 
in 1318, with an army led by his favourite slave Khusrau Khan, 
resolved to retake Devagiri. The reduction of Harapala involved 
some hard fighting in mountainous country; he was wounded in 
the final encounter, taken prisoner and put to death — flayed alive, 
according to Bami. The sultan’s return to Delhi was delayed 
by rains, so during his enforced stay in Devagiri he reorganized 
the administration. Malik Yak Lakhy was made governor of 
Devagiri; subordinate officers and collectors of revenue were 
stationed at different places, and garrisons posted at strategic 
points. An attempt to force a garrison on the Hoysala capital 
Dvarasamudra failed. When the sultan returned to Delhi (August 
1318) he left Khusrau Khan behind to deal with Prataparudra II 
of Warangal who had not sent his annual tribute after the death 
of Ala-ud-din. Khusrau therefore marched in, collected all the 
arrears due and easily restored the sultan’s supremacy. 

Shortly afterwards, however, Khusrau had to march south 
again to suppress the rebellious governor of Devagiri and then to 
bring the country of Ma’bar under Muslim rule. Malik Yak 
Lakhy had set up independent rule under the title Shams-ud-din 
and began to mint coins in his own name; but his easygoing and 
profligate nature made him thoroughly unpopular, so that the 
nobles of his court joined together to capture him and hand him 
over to Khusrau when he advanced towards Devagiri. The un- 
fortunate rebel was sent, bound hand and foot, to Delhi, while 
Khusrau proceeded further southward. 

The civil war between VIra Pandya and Sundara Pandya con- 
tinued after Malik Kafur’s return (13 1 1). Sundara fared so badly 
in the struggle that at first he sought Muslim aid which was given 
only in very small measure and availed him little. The ruler of 
south Travancore, Ravivarman Kulasekhara, who professed 
allegiance to Sundara till about 1312, took advantage of the con- 
fusion to invade the Pandya country and marched as far north as 
Kanchlpuram. Vlra Pandya seems to have joined him, and Sunda- 
ra Pandya appealed to the Kakatlya ruler Prataparudra II for aid. 
A large army was sent in his support in 1317, under the leadership 
of Muppidi Nayaka, the governor of Nellore, who defeated Ravi- 
varman Kulasekhara and VIra Pandya, compelled the former to 




222 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

withdraw into his own kingdom, and installed Sundara Pandya 
on the throne at Vlradhavalapattanam (Blr Dhul). Then came 
Khusrau’s invasion. The Pandya followed hts usual policy of 
evading battle by evacuating his capital, taking his family and aU 
his wealth with him. A rich Muslim merchant who stayed 
behind hoping his religion would protect hun was robbed and 
insulted by Khusrau, and finally committed suicide. Nevertheless, 
Khusrau’s expedition was not a success. Rains hampered his 
movements; and, what is more, he himself seems to have con- 
templated rebellion. When this was discovered and disapproved 
of by his followers, he had to submit to being earned back in 
fetters to Delhi. , ... . . 

The political revolution in Delhi which ended Khalji rule and 
ushered in that of the Tughlakhs gave Prataparudra II the oppor- 
tunity of declaring himself free once again. His example spread 
and caused disaffection even in that part of Maharashtra which was 
under a governor of the sultanate. Ghiyas-ud-din Tughlak 
resolved, therefore, to do away with the Hindu kingdoms of the 
South one after another until the sway of Islam extended to Cape 




BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 223 
chiefs to the court of the king. He then accompanied Ulugh Khan 
back to Devagiri. His way of dealing with the rebels proved 
effective ; some of them fell fighting, others fled and hid themselves, 
and others were caught and sent to Delhi to be executed under the 
orders of the sultan. 

Elated by his success against the invader, Prataparudra dis- 
persed the troops and provisions he had gathered in his capital, 
and acted as if he had secured perpetual immunity from further 
attack. To Ghiyas-ud-din, on the other hand, the failure of his 
son in Telengana was but a spur to a further and stronger effort to 
reduce that country. He sent large reinforcements to Devagiri, 
and Ulugh Khan soon led a second expedition against the Kakatlya 
kingdom. Bidar on its western frontier and several other forts 
including Bodhan were captured by the invadingtroops, andWaran- 
gal itself invested. Ill-prepared as Prataparudra was, he held out 
for five months after which famine compelled him to sue for peace. 
He delivered himself and his family into the hands of Ulugh Khan 
(1323) who sent him under a strong escort to Delhi, but he seems 
to have put an end to his own life on the way. Ulugh Khan plunder- 
ed and devastated Warangal, and subjugated the rest of the country 
by fighting where resistance was offered, but generally by accepting 
the submission of the Hindu chieftains in the different localities. 

Ulugh Khan also sent an army into Ma’bar. The country was 
conquered and, for a time, brought under the sway of Delhi, 
whither the Pandya king, Parakramadeva, was taken as a prisoner. 
Ma’bar, in fact, was still counted as a province of the Delhi empire 
when sultan Muhammad bin Tughlak made Devagiri its capital 
in 1326. Ulugh Khan led yet another expedition against Jajnagar 
in the Ganga kingdom of Orissa. Here his aim was not so much 
to conquer that kingdom as to secure the frontier of Warangal on 
that side. 

Thus at the accession of Muhammad bin Tughlak considerable 
portionsoftheDeccanandSouth India acknowledged the sovereign- 
ty of the Delhi sultanate. Devagiri and Warangal were under the 
effective control of imperial officers, and a viceroy was set over 
distant Ma’bar charged with the duty of consolidating the new 
conquests and firmly establishing and extending imperial authority. 
Prominent among the Hindu states that still continued to enjoy 
their independence were Kampili and Dvarasamudra. The famous 
king of Kampili, himself called Kampilideva, rose to prominence 




224 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

in the first years of the fourteenth century when he rendered 
valuable service to his suzerain Ramadeva of Devagiri m the wars 
against Hoysala Ballala III. He was a consistent opponent of the 
growing power of Islam in the South, but was much hampered by 
his feuds with the neighbouring states of Dvaraamudra and 
Warangal. All the same, he built up a kingdom of considerable 
size which included parts of the present-day Anantapur Chitaldrug 
and Shimoga districts besides Raichur, Dharwar and BeUary; the 
Krishna river separated it from the Maratha province of the Delhi 
empire. He treated with contempt a demand for tribute from the 
officers of the Tughlak sultanate, and entered into friendly negotia- 
tions with Baha-ud-din Garshasp, a cousin of Muhammad bin 
Tughlak and governor of Sagar, in the neighbourhood of Gulbarga, 
who had some grievance against his cousin, laid claim to the Delhi 
throne, and set up the standard of revolt. Thereupon the sultan 
ordered Malik Zada, governor of Gujarat, and Majir Abu Rija, 
governor of Devagiri, to deal with the rebel. A battle on the banks 
of the Godavari ended disastrously for Garshasp who fled to 
Sagar pursued by the victorious imperial army. He soon left 
Qi r with his women and children and took refuge with Kampi- 


lideva. Meanwhile the sultan had taken the field in person and 
came down to Devagiri where he got news of the defeat of Gar- 
shasp and of his flight to Kampili. The task of reducing die 
defiant Hindu ruler who harboured the defeated rebel engaged his 
attention at once, but it proved more troublesome than he had 
anticipated, and two expeditions failed to take the strong tortress 
of Kummata. The third attempt led by Malik Zada ended in 
success; Kummata was overthrown, and Kampilideva was forced 
to shut himself up in Hosadurg (Anegondi), which was invested on 
aU sides by the sultan’s troops. Lack of provisions made it 
impossible for the besieged to hold out longer than a month; but 
meanwhile, Kampilideva succeeded in sending Garshasp and his 


family to the court of Dvarasamudra, commending them to the care 
of Ballala III. Kampilideva met his end with courage and deter- 
mination. He announced to his women that he had made up his 


mind to die fighting, and advised them to bum themselves in 
advance to escape falling into the hands of the enemy. They did 
so cheerfully, and their example was followed by the wives and 
daughters of the ministers and nobles of the kingdom. There- 
upon Kampilideva and his followers sallied out of the fort, fell 



BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 225 
upon the enemy and wrought havoc in their ranks before they fell 
in the fight. Kampilideva’s head was stuffed and sent to the 
sultan to announce the victory, and a garrison was posted at 
Hosadurg to hold the country round about (1327). 

Malik Zada then began to plan an invasion of the Hoysala 
kingdom in pursuit of Baha-ud-din. Ballala III had no mind to 
risk his kingdom and fortune by sheltering a rebel Muslim sent to 
him by Kampili, with whom he had never been friendly. He 
therefore seized Baha-ud-din when he presented himself and sent 
him to Malik Zada, at the same time acknowledging the supremacy 
of the sultan of Delhi. This pleased Malik Zada who withdrew 
his forces and returned to Devagiri. 

For some time after the fall of Kampili, Muhammad bin Tugh- 
lak remained in Devagiri, making arrangements to complete the 
transfer of the imperial capital to that place. Also, after a siege of 
eight months, he captured the strong fortress at Kandhyana 
(Sinhagad) near Poona, and forced its Hindu chieftain, Naga Naya- 
ka, ruler of the Kolis, into subjection. Naga Nayaka was treated 
with honour when he made his submission and the fort passed 
into the hands of the sultan who returned north very shortly 
afterwards. 

With pardonable exaggeration, Muslim historians include the 
whole of the Deccan and South India in the empire of Delhi in 
this period (1324-35). They divide it into the five provinces of 
Devagiri, Tiling, Kampili, Dvarasamudra and Ma’bar; some add- 
ing Jajnagar (Orissa) as a sixth, although there is less justification 
for this. Each of these provinces had a governor ( naib ) set over it 
who was assisted by a military coadjutor in charge of the provincial 
army, and a kotwal who policed the capital of the province. Except 
in Devagiri, however, the power of the sultan was nowhere firmly 
established. Dvarasamudra, for example, owed nothing more 
than nominal allegiance, and the bulk of the people — especially in 
the rural areas — was not reconciled to the new rule. The system 
of iqtas (military fiefs) by which the land was parcelled out among 
Muslim chieftains who had to maintain a quota of troops and pay 
a stipulated amount to the treasury did not make for peace or 
smooth administration. No wonder that this loose fabric crumbled 
quickly at the first touch of revolt which came naturally not long 
after. 

The movement for the liberation of Deccan from the Muslims 



from the ancient line of the Chalukyas and became the progenitor of 
the later Aravldu kings of Vijayanagar, led the Hindus of the western 
Telugu country in revolt against their Muslim overlord Malik 
Muhammad, governor of Kampili. With the centre of his power 
in the neighbourhood of Kumool, he seized the forts of Anegondi, 
Raichur and Mudgal. As the Hoysala Ballala III also threw off 
his allegiance to the sultan and invaded the province of Kampili, 
Malik Muhammad was helpless. He told the sultan (as Nuniz 
records) that ‘the land was risen against him’, ‘everyone was lord 
of what he pleased, and no one was on his side’ ; the people came to 
‘besiege him in the fortress, allowing no provisions to go in to him, 
nor paying him the taxes that had been forced on them’. On the 
advice of his councillors that order could only be restored by 
someone connected with the late Raja of Kampili, the sultan sent 





BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 


227 


Harihara and his brother Bukka to govern the province of Kampili 
after taking oaths and pledges of loyalty from them. 

Harihara and Bukka belonged to a family of five brothers, all 
sons of Sangama. They were at first in the service of Pratapa- 
rudra II, but after the Muslim conquest of that kingdom in 1323 
they went over to Kampili. When Kampili also fell in 1327, they 
became prisoners and were carried off to Delhi where, because 
they embraced Islam, they stood well with the sultan. Now, once 
again, they were sent to the province of Kampili to take over its 
administration from Malik Muhammad and to deal with the revolt 
of the Hindu subjects. What really happened after their arrival 
in the South does not emerge clearly from the conflicting versions 
of Muslim historians and Hindu tradition. Both are agreed, how- 
ever, that the two trusted lieutenants of the sultanate very soon 
gave up Islam and the cause of Delhi, and proceeded to set up an 
independent Hindu state which soon grew into the powerful empire 
of Vijayanagar. They started by doing the work of the sultan, 
their former connexion with Anegondi making their task easy, 
though their Muslim faith set some people against them. They 
followed a policy of conciliation which pacified the people, and 
only used force where it was absolutely necessary. 

Gutti and its neighbourhood appear to have acknowledged 
Harihara earlier than the rest of the country, but a war undertaken 
against Ballala III was not very successful at first. Then, Hindu 
tradition avers, the brothers met the sage Vidyaranya and, fired by 
his teaching, returned to the Hindu fold and accepted the mission 
of upholding the Hindu cause against Islam. A second expedition 
against Ballala had better results, and left Harihara free to pursue 
his schemes of conquest and consolidation. 

Meanwhile important political changes elsewhere proclaimed 
the approaching doom of the Tughlak empire in the South. Jalal- 
ud-din Hasan Shah, the governor of Ma’bar, asserted his indepen- 
dence after doing away with the loyal lieutenants of the sultan, 
and began to issue gold and silver coins in his own name from 
Madura (1333-4). Sultan Muhammad bin Tughlak got news of 
the revolt and marched to Warangal, where the outbreak of an 
epidemic decimated his army and the sultan himself caught the 
infection. He therefore had to retrace his steps, having achieved 
nothing, and thus destroyed what remained of the prestige of the 
Delhi sultanate in the South. A false rumour that the sultan had 




They ousted the Muslim garrisons from the forts of that country 
and entrusted the task of its administration to a scion of the line 
of Sambuvarayas, the native rulers of the region at the time. Other 
Hindu kingdoms came up elsewhere. The Koppula chiefs of 
Pithapuram made themselves masters of the coastal region from 
the Godavari to Kalinga; the Reddis of Kondavidu formed a 
principality which extended from Sri Sailam to the Bay of Bengal; 
mid the Velamas raised a small state round Rajakonda in the hilly 
Uact of the Nalgonda district of Hyderabad state. The power of 
the Tughlak sultans was thus completely broken all overthe Deccan 
except in the Maratha provinces. In Ma’bar half the territory had 
been recovered for Hindu rule, and although the rest was held by 
a Muslim ruler, he was a rebel against the sultan. 

We may well believe that this general anti-Islamic movement 
did much to disturb the loyalty of Harihara and Bukka to the sultan 
and to kindle in their minds a longing to serve their country and 
their ancestral religion in the old way. Their encounter with 
Vidyaranya (‘Forest of Learning’) thus probably furnished them 
with the best and perhaps the only means of following the prompt- 
ings of their hearts; it needed a spiritual leader of his eminence to 
receive them back from Islam into Hinduism and to render the act 


generally acceptable to Hindu society. Thus it happened that 




the deity to whom all the land south of the Krishna river was 
supposed to belong, and his successors kept up the practice he 
started of authenticating all their acts of state by the sign manual 
of Sri Virupaksha. 

Ballala’s part in the establishment of Sambuvaraya power in 
the northern districts of Ma’bar involved him in continuous hos- 
tilities with the newly-established sultanate of Madura and this led 
very' soon to the absorption of the Hoysala kingdom in the rising 
state of Vijayanagar. At Madura, Jalal-ud-din Hasan Shah fell by 
assassination (1340) after a rule of five years, and was succeeded by 
one of his amirs , Ala-ud-din Udauji, a warlike prince who planned 
an expedition against Ballala. The Hoysala monarch stationed 
himself at Tiruvannamalai in 1340; Udauji’s invasion came in 1341, 
but in the hour of victory an arrow shot by an unknown hand struck 


Ma 

the 

Th 

Ko 


history 


d to allow them to { 
to settle the terms of s 




therefore revolted at the end of the first day’s march, returned to 
Daulatabad, imprisoned its weak governor, and proclaimed one 
among themselves, Ismail Mukh, the Afghan, king of the Deccan 
under the title Nasir-ud-din Shah. An imperial army led by 
Muhammad himself soon made its appearance on the scene from 
Broach, defeated the rebels and shut them up in the citadel of 
Daulatabad. Some of them, including Ismail Mukh’s brothers, 
contrived to make their escape to Gulbarga under the leadership 
of Hasan Gangu alias Zafar Khan. After about three months, 
Iiasan gathered a considerable army, including some contingents 
from Kapaya Nayak of Warangal, and marched to Bidar. Mean- 
while, Muhammad was called away by a rebellion in Gujarat, and 
Hasan easily defeated and dispersed an imperial army after slaying 
its commander. As he approached Daulatabad, the royal troops 
gave up the siege and retired to Malwa. The aged and ease- 
loving Nasir-ud-din Ismail Shah, the new king of the Deccan, 
now readily abdicated his troublesome charge in favour of Hasan 
who proclaimed himself ruler of the Deccan on 3 August 1347 
under the name Sultan Abu’l Muzaffar Ala-ud-din Bahman Shah. 
He is said to have traced his descent from a half-mythical hero of 




( i 358-77)» a diligent and methodical adn 
ons long survived him and influenced 
ims. He established a council of eight 




BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 233 
brigands lost their lives before the sultan was satisfied that the 
safety of the roads had been secured. The great mosque of 
Gulbarga was completed in 1367. It is perhaps the only mosque 
in India which has no open courtyard and has been described as 
‘a noble building impressive in its massive solidity’. He secured 
recognition from the puppet caliph of Egypt as a result of his 

mother's journey to Mecca (1361). 

Muhammad waged wars with Telengana and Vijayanagar and 
had to suppress a revolt in Daulatabad. By issuing large quantities 
of gold coins he earned the resentment of the rulers oi Telengana 
and Vijayanagar who regarded it as an assertion of supremacy on 
his part. They therefore induced the bankers of the BahmanI 
kingdom, mostly Hindus, to hoard and melt down the new coins. 
The irate sultan ordered them to desist, but when his warnings 
were disregarded, the Hindu bankers in all the towns of the king- 
dom were massacred 1 (June 1360), and replaced by khatris from 
Northern India. Not content with setting up the bankers against 
him, the neighbouring Hindu rulers sent hostile messages to 
Muhammad— KapayaNayaka demanded the restoration of Kaulas, 
and Bukka the cession of the Raichur doab, and threatened to join 
Delhi in taking measures against him. Muhammad merely 
detained their messengers for eighteen months, during which time 
he completed his preparations. He then sent back haughty 
answers calling upon his ‘vassals’ to explain their failure to make the 
customary offerings at his accession, and to make it good by send- 
ing him all their elephants laden with gold, jewels and other 
treasure. Kapaya Nayak’s reply was to send an army under his 
son Vinayak Deo (or Nagdev according to some accounts) against 
Kaulas, aided by a body of 20,000 horse sent by Bukka. Vinayak 
Deo, however, was beaten back by Bahadur Khan who advanced 
to Warangal and collected 100,000 gold huns and 26 elephants 
before he left Telengana. This resulted in permanent estrange- 
ment between the two kingdoms and continued hostilities. For 
example, in 1362 a caravan of horse-dealers reported that horses 
meant for Gulbarga had been forcibly purchased by Vinayak Deo, 
whereupon Muhammad captured and executed the Hindu prince 
and caused the devastation of much of the Telengana country, 
though not without serious losses to himself. 

‘ The descendants of these unfortunate men were allowed to resume their 
business in the reign of Firuz Shah (1397-1422) on payment of large sums. 



trances he insisted on the literal execution of this rash order. When 
his messenger took the draft to Vijayanagar, Bukka had him paraded 
on an ass in his city, and then crossed the Tungabhadra and seized 
Mudgal. Muhammad was furious and incontinently marched 
against Bukka though only with a moderate force. Bukka with- 
drew with his cavalry to Adoni, leaving the infantry to face the 
enemy and defend the country. Muhammad plundered and killed 
the defenceless inhabitants in the villages before he retired into 
Mudgal for the rains. The rest of his army then joined him; he 
marched in the direction of Adoni and, early in 1367, a battle was 
fought at Kauthal, south of the Tungabhadra. The Muslims 
gained the victory, thanks to their guns and their cavalry, the 
Hindu artillery not coming into play till it was too late, and their 
commander Mallinatha being mortally wounded. Ferishta is very 
definite that guns were used by both sides on this occasion and that 
the gunners were generally Europeans and Ottoman Turks. After 
his defeat, Bukka eluded Muhammad’s pursuit for three months, 

and finally shu 

to besiege the ■ 

Bukka ventur. 



BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 235 
Hindus, ten thousand Brahmin priests among them, lost their lives 
in the massacre. So shocked were both sides by the dimensions 
of the slaughter that an agreement was made to spare non- 
combatants in future wars. Though violated on occasions, this 
agreement did do something to mitigate the horrors of the 
perpetual contest between the two states. 

After the end of the war with Vijayanagar, Muhammad easily 
suppressed the revolt in Daulatabad ; Bahram Khan fled and was 
pursued to the frontiers of Gujarat. 

Muhammad gets a good character from Ferishta to whom cruelty 
to infidels was, if anything, a commendation. The author of the 
Burhan-i-Ma'asir says that he died as a result of an ‘irreligious 
manner of living’, meaning perhaps indulgence in drink. The 
internal affairs of the kingdom during the reign were managed by 
Saif-ud-din Ghori, who had served the first sultan well and continu- 
ed in service till the accession of the sixth sultan when he died at 
an age of more than ioo. 

Muhammad was succeeded by his eldest son Mujahid, who 
provoked a quarrel with Vijayanagar by demanding territory and 
then invaded that kingdom. Bukka adopted the plan of wearing 
out his enemy by avoiding battle and finally retired into his capital. 
Although its outer defences were carried by the enemy, they soon 
afterwards sustained a decisive defeat. A futile siege of Adoni for 
nine months was followed by peace. Mujahid rebuked his uncle, 
Daud Khan, for the inefficiency of his operations against the city of 
Vijayanagar. Daud Khan retaliated by conspiring to procure 
Mujahid’s murder on 15 April 1378 and made himself king. 
Within a month, however, Mujahid’s sister contrived to have 
Daud murdered, and Muhammad II, son of the youngest son 
of Ala-ud-din I, was proclaimed king. 

Muhammad II was a man of peace, devoted to religion and 
poetry. He sent large presents to Hafiz of Persia together with an 
invitation to visit him, but the poet was frightened by a storm in the 
Persian Gulf and would not continue his journey to India. A less 
amiable side of his character, however, is to be seen during the 
years of famine between 1387 and 1395, when the relief measures 
he organized were confined to his Muslim subjects. Muhammad 
II died of a fever in April 1397 and was succeeded by his elder son 
— Ghiyas-ud-din, a strong-willed and indiscreet youth of seven- 
teen. Within two months (June 1397) he was dethroned and 


236 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

blinded by an angry Turkish slave, Tughalchin, who raised to the 
throne Shams-ud-din Daud, Ghiyas-ud-din’s younger half-brother 
and made himself regent. Firuz and his brother Ahmad, sons-in- 
law of Muhammad II and grandsons of Ala-ud-din I, wanted to 
redeem the royal line from domination by a slave, and, after an 
initial failure, succeeded in overpowering Tughalchin and his 
master in the palace in November 1397. Firuz became king 
under the title Taj-ud-din Firuz Shah. 

Firuz had a vigorous body and a keen mind. Ferishta consi- 
dered him the greatest of the BahmanI kings, and the author of the 
Burhan-i-Ma' asir speaks of him as a ‘good, just, and generous king 
who supported himself by copying the Quran, and the ladies of 
whose harem used to support themselves by embroidering garments 
and selling them’. But these are exaggerated estimates, and there 
is no doubt that Firuz drank hard and his character degenerated as 
his reign advanced; he ruined his vigorous body by excessive indul- 
gence in the company of women. He built a new city Firuzabad 



BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 237 
Harihara fled to Vijayanagar, carrying with him the corpse of his 
ill-fated son. Firuz pursued him and took large numbers of 
prisoners, including 10,000 Brahmins, but released the captives on 
payment of a big ransom, and the war came to an end. Firuz 
now separated the Raichur doab from the home province of 
Gulbarga, and appointed Fulad Khan as its first military governor. 

Soon after, Firuz led a successful expedition against Narsingh 
of Kherla who had to surrender 40 elephants, much money and 
a daughter into the hands of Firuz as the price of peace. In 1401 
Firuz sent a mission with presents to Timur, and Timur issued a 
decree bestowing the Deccan, Malwa and Gujarat on Firuz. The 
rulers of Malwa and Gujarat were alarmed and entered into negoti- 
ations with Harihara II who now began to withhold tribute and defy 
Firuz successfully; fearing an attack from the north, Firuz let 
Harihara alone. Harihara died in 1404, and two years later his son 
Devaraya I started a war on account of a pretty girl, the daughter 
of a goldsmith of Mudgal, who had caught his fancy. Devaraya’s 
attempt to seize her by force miscarried, and he laid waste some 
villages in the neighbourhood of Mudgal. This act of aggression 
provoked Firuz who invaded Vijayanagar and attacked the city; 
being wounded himself, he had to withdraw to a fortified camp some 
distance away from where he sent his lieutenants to ravage and 
conquer the country to the south of the city up to Adoni. Devaraya 
had to make peace on the terms laid down by the sultan which 
included the gift of a daughter in marriage, the surrender of the 
fort and district of Bankapur as her dowry, besides a large quantity 
of pearls, 50 elephants, 2,000 boys and girls skilled in song and 
dance, and the payment of a large cash indemnity. The marriage 
of the king’s daughter was celebrated with due pomp, but as he did 
not accompany Firuz far enough out of the city when he left it, 
they parted in anger. Firuz secured for his son Hasan Khan the 
girl whose charms had brought on the war. 

In 1412, the Gond governor of Mahur rebelled against Firuz 
who marched into Gondwana but had to return without suppress- 
ing the revolt. About this time Firuz began to suspect his brother 
Ahmad of plotting against him, as the saint Jamal-ud-din Husaini 
prophesied his accession to the throne. Two slaves became the 
sultan’s favourites and received the titles Ain-ul-Mulk and Nizam- 
ul-Mulk. In 1417, an expedition against Telengana was success- 
ful in killing Katayavema Reddi of Rajahmundry in battle and 




the siege of the fortress lasted for two years at the end of which 
disease began to decimate the ranks of the BahmanI forces. The 
success of Vijayanagar was complete on this occasion, and Firuz 
had to retreat leaving the southern and eastern districts of his 
kingdom in the occupation of the enemy. Firuz was completely 
shaken by this defeat and was henceforth a broken man; he spent 
the rest of his life in works of piety, according to his light, and left 
the affairs of state more and more to the two favourite slaves. 

Ahmad’s position was endangered by their ascendancy, and he 
fled from the capital with some adherents, including a rich mer- 
chant from Basra by name Khalaf Hasan. On his advice, Ahmad 
assumed the royal title in his camp near Kalyani, defeated troops 
sent against him, and pursued them to the capital. Firuz was too ill 
to do anything, and his army deserted him in favour of Ahmad, who 
accepted his brother’s abdication and took charge of his two sons 
Hasan Khan and Mubarak Khan (September 1422). Firuz died 
within a few days, it was said, strangled or poisoned under Ahmad’s 

Ahmad Shah (1422-35) richly endowed the saint who had 
prophesied his accession and had advised him on several occasions 
when he was in difficulty; he also rewarded his other friends, like 
the merchant of Basra, with offices and rank. He ordained that 
each provincial governor was to rank as a commander of 2,000 ; but 
this did not mean that the troops under him were restricted to this 
number. 

Ahmad proceeded against Vijayaraya of Vijayanagar to avenge 
the disasters of the last reign; a battle on the banks of the Tunga- 
bhadra was followed by the most ruthless devastations of Vijaya- 
nagar country. Indiscriminate slaughter and enslavement of the 
civil population, destruction of temples and the slaughter of cows 
were the special features of this campaign. 

In March 1423, while out hunting, Ahmad pursued an antelope 
until he was separated from his bodyguard. At this disadvantage, 
he was spotted by a body of Hindu cavalry, but was saved by the 
timely arrival of a detachment of his own troops under a faithful 
officer Abdul Qadir. The latter was rewarded with the title of 
Khan Jahan and the governorship of Berar, and his brother, Abdul 
Latif, became Khan A’zam and governor of Bidar. Foreign 



BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 239 
mounted archers played a great part in the rescue and were hence- 
forth a strong corps in the Bahmani army. The war against 
Vijayanagar was only concluded when Vijayaraya agreed to pay the 
‘arrears of tribute’, a vast amount; his son Devaraya accompanied 
the sultan on his way back as far as the Krishna. The sultan 
carried away many prisoners with him, among them two able 
Brahmin youths who became Muslims, one of them later becoming 
the first independent sultan of Berar, and the other the 
father of that Ahmad who founded the Nizam Shahi line of 
Ahmadnagar. 

In both 1423 and 1424 the rains failed and there was famine. 
Ahmad prayed for rain publicly on the top of a hill outside the 
capital and when his prayer was apparently answered, he 
was hailed a saint ( wali ). This, however, did not prevent 
him, at the end of 1424, from invading Telengana, where he 
captured Warangal, and slew its king. The governor of Bidar 
was left to reduce the rest of the country and extend the 
kingdom to the sea. This was the end of that Hindu kingdom. 

In 1425 Ahmad proceeded against Mahur, whose rebellious 
raja was enticed by a promise of pardon and then slain along with 
6,000 of his followers. Ahmad next led a raid into Gondwana and 
spent a year in Ellichpur, rebuilding the forts of Gawilgarh and 
Namala on his northern frontier, as a preparation for the conquest 
of Gujarat and Malwa which had been granted by Timur to his 
brother. To the same end, he entered into a close alliance with 
Khandesh, a small state over which both Gujarat and Malwa had 
claims of suzerainty. In his turn, Hushang Shah of Malwa had, 
by 1422, compelled Narsingh of Kherla, a vassal of the Bahmani 
sultan, to swear fealty to Malwa. In 1428 he invaded Kherla to 
collect tribute, and on Narsingh’s appeal for aid, Ahmad marched 
to Ellichpur. Hushang pressed on with the siege of Kherla, but 
Ahmad was assailed by doubts about the morality of attacking a 
brother Muslim in defence of an infidel, and gave up the cause of 
Narsingh and retired to his own country. Hushang attributed 
Ahmad’s retreat to cowardice, and pursued him with a considerable 
force, whereupon Ahmad defeated him decisively on the banks of 
the Tapti; 200 elephants and all the baggage in Hushang’s camp 
along with the ladies of his harem fell into the hands of the victor. 
Narsingh issued from Kherla and pursued Hushang’s beaten troops 
into Malwa, while Ahmad advanced to Kherla. There he was 




240 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

well entertained by Narsingh, and sent the women back to Hushang 

under a strong escort. 

On his return from this campaign, Ahmad stayed in Bidar for 
some time, where he was so struck by its situation and climate 
that he decided to build a new city near its ancient fortress and 
called it Ahmadabad-Bidar. This became the new capital where 
he settled in 1 429. About the same time his eldest son, Ala-ud-din 
Ahmad, married the daughter of Nasir Khan of Khandesh. In 
1430, Ahmad ordered a wanton attack on Gujarat, then under 
Ahmad I ; the Deccan army was twice defeated, and an attempt on 
Mahaim on the island of Bombay also resulted in great losses. 
But Ahmad BahmanI obstinately persisted in his effort so that 
there was much fighting in 1431 on the southern frontier of 
Gujarat, although the Deccan troops gained no advantage. In 
1432, Ahmad put his sister’s son Sher Khan to death, suspecting 
him of designs upon the throne. Sher Khan had been among 
those who had advised Ahmad earlier in his life to end his brother’s 
feeble rule and make himself king. 

The Gujarat war exhausted Ahmad, and Hushang of Malwa, 
who knew this, captured Kherla and killed Narsingh. Ahmad 
marched north to avenge this insult, but Nasir Khan intervened 
and made peace between them on terms by no means favourable to 
Ahmad. Kherla was acknowledged to be a fief of Malwa, while 
the rest of Berar remained a province of the Deccan. Ahmad then 
punished some of the petty chieftains of Telengana and restored 
order (1424-5) * n the. province ruled by one of his sons. He died 
in 1435 aged about sixty-four. Unlike his brother Firuz, whose 
learning had imparted a touch of scepticism to his outlook on life, 
Ahmad was a superstitious Muslim, with a tinge of fanaticism, apt 
to show too much reverence to any long-haired ‘saint’. But he was 
not altogether incapable of enjoying wit and learning, and at his 
instance the poet Azari of Isfarayln in Khurasan composed the 
Bahman-nama , a versified history of the dynasty, now lost. From 
such quotations as have survived, we know it to have been a rather 
poor imitation of the Shah-nama. Azari retired to his native place 
before Ahmad’s death, but continued writing his history up to his 
death in 1462; it was added to regularly by other hands till the 
end of the dynasty. 

The regular employment of foreigners — ‘l urks, Arabs, Moguls 
and Persians — in the civil and military offices of the state gave 




BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 241 
rise to rivalry between them and the local Muslims, the Deccanis, 
who were backed by African negroes as well as by the offspring of 
African fathers and Indian mothers. The ‘foreigners’ alleged that 
the disasters of the Gujarat war were due to the cowardice of the 
Deccanis, and the quarrels between the rival factions often led to 
pitched battles and bloody massacres. The ‘foreigners’ were 
generally Shiahs while the Deccanis were Sunnis, and this added 
acerbity to their disputes which had no small share in weakening 
the Bahmani sultanate and its succession states. 

Ahmad the Saint was succeeded by his eldest son Ala-ud-din II 
(1436-58). He surrounded himself with foreigners and the 
jealousy and intrigues of the Deccanis were the source of much 
trouble during his reign. He sent his brother Muhammad to 
recover ‘arrears of tribute’ from Devaraya II of Vijayanagar, which 
he did. This success turned Muhammad’s head, and he demanded 
equal power with the sultan or one half of the kingdom for himself. 
The result was a war in which he was beaten, but he was pardoned 
and made governor of the Raichur doab and remained loyal to his 
brother ever after. 

Parts of Konkan were conquered in 1437, and the raja of Sanga- 
meSvar gave his daughter in marriage to the sultan, who preferred 
her to his first wife, the daughter of Nasir Khan of Khandesh. To 
avenge this slight, Nasir Khan invaded Berar, induced many 
officials of the province to take his side, and confined its governor, 
Khan Jahan, to the fortress of Narnala. At this juncture, the 
Deccani party recommended caution to the sultan, while the Malik- 
ut-Tujjar Khalaf Hasan Basri, the governor of Daulatabad and 
leader of the foreigners, declared his readiness to take the field if 
he was given foreign troops and no Deccanis. He had his way and 
won a splendid success as a result of which the supremacy of the 
foreign party seemed assured ; they took the place of honour on the 
right side of the throne, while the Deccanis were relegated to the 
left. 

Meanwhile Devaraya II had reorganized his army and made it 
an efficient striking force of all arms. In 1443, he invaded the 
Raichur doab, captured Mudgal, besieged Raichur and Bankapur, 
and laid waste the country upto Bijapur and Sagar. On the 
approach of Ala-ud-din, he withdrew to Mudgal, and Malik-ut- 
Tujjar was able to raise the sieges of Raichur and Bankapur. 
Three battles between the two armies followed in as many months. 



242 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

In the first, the Hindus won the day, while the Muslims won the 
second ; in the third, Devaraya’s elder son was killed and his troops 
driven headlong back to Mudgal. Two important Muslim officers 
of the Bahmani army were captured and imprisoned; but when the 
sultan sent word that the lives of 200,000 Hindus would be the 
price of these officers, Devaraya agreed to make peace and to pay 
‘tribute’ regularly in future. 

Ala-ud-din’s character degenerated with age and he began to 
indulge in gross sensual pleasures to the neglect of public business. 
The Deccanis took advantage of this to compass the destruction of 
the foreigners’ party. In 1446-7, an expedition against the Konkan 
was organized, with Malik-ut-Tujjar Khalaf Hasan appointed to 
the command. The intrigues of the Deccanis with two Hindu 
princes, one of them the raja of Sangamesvar, brought about the 
defeat of the army and the slaughter of large numbers of the 
foreigners including Malik-ut-Tujjar himself. The survivors 
gathered in the fort of Chakan to the north of Poona, but the Decca- 
nis followed up their game by bringing false accusations of treason 
against them and persuading the sultan to agree to their assassina- 
tion. They then contrived to murder all the officers at a banquet, 
and to slaughter 1,200 Sayyids and 1,000 other foreigners besides 
numerous children, appropriating to themselves the wives, 
daughters and goods of their victims. The few who escaped, 
Quasim Beg and two other officers among them, managed to 
convey to the sultan a true account of what had happened. 
Ala-ud-din was overcome by remorse, executed the leaders of the 
Deccani party, and reduced their families to penury. Quasim 
Beg became governor of Daulatabad, and his two companions 
were promoted to high rank. The foreign party regaine_d its 
ascendancy, and in 1451 the king got a letter from the poet Azarl 
of Isfarayin urging him to abandon the use of wine and dismiss 
all Deccani officials. He did both and began to take more 
interest in state affairs. 

During 1453 the sultan was confined to his palace for a time by 
an injury to his leg, and rumours of his death began to spread. 
Sikandar, governor of Telengana, rebelled and invited Mahmud I 
of Malwa to invade Berar and joined him there in 1456. When 
Ala-ud-din took the field in person, Mahmud, who had been led to 
believe that he was dead, retired to Malwa. Sikandar and his 
father were defeated and captured after a siege by Mahmud Gawan, 


BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 243 
a foreigner who was just rising to power, but the sultan pardoned 
them. 

Ala-ud-din died in 1458. While he drank wine himself, he 
sternly discouraged its use among his subjects. He built a free 
hospital at Bidar and displayed his piety by sitting through long 
sermons, and by building mosques with the material acquired from 
the Hindu temples he destroyed. Before he died he designated 
his eldest son Humayun as his successor. 

Humayun (1458-61) had an evil reputation for cruelty and the 
savage deeds that marked his reign earned for him the title of 
zaiim or ‘tyrant’. At the start of his reign, some officers made 







244 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

and together threatened the rear of the Malwa army which was thus 
compelled to retreat. Another raid from Malwa in the following 
year did not advance beyond Daulatabad thanks once again to the 
timely intervention of the ruler of Gujarat. 

The young sultan died suddenly on 30 July 1463, and was 
succeeded by his brother Muhammad III, then only nine years of 
age. The regency council carried on the government during the 
king’s minority, as in the previous reign, but Khvaja Jahan’s 
ambition disturbed the harmony. The queen-mother suspected 
his designs when she found that Mahmud Gawan was, in effect, 
banished from the capital and kept constantly employed on the 
frontier. She arranged for her son to order the execution of 
Khvaja Jahan as a traitor. She then recalled Mahmud Gavan, 
who had bestowed great care on the education of the king, to the 
capital where he became chief officer with the title Amir-ul-Umara. 
The queen-mother retired when her son was fifteen, and retained 
his affection and respect throughout her life. 

A campaign against Kherla.then in the possession of Mahmud I 
of Malwa, was undertaken in 1467 ; but nothing was gained by this, 
peace was made, and Kherla continued to be a fief of Malwa as in 
the reign of Ahmad the Saint. Mahmud Gawan, who still retained 
the government of Bijapur, undertook an expedition against the 
Hindu rajas of the Konkan, a country that was never completely 
subjugated by the Bahmani sultans. In particular, Mahmud 
Gawan wanted to prevent the rajas of Khelna (Visalgarh) and 
SangameSvar from using their fleets off the west coast to harass 
Muslim merchants and pilgrims. By patience and the calcu- 
lated employment of force and corruption he gained several 
successes, and finally captured Goa, then the best port of the 
Vijayanagar empire. This last victory was important not only as 
an achievement against the permanent enemy of the Bahmani 
kingdom, but as giving to that kingdom a virtual command over 
the west coast trade, besides guaranteeing the safety of Muslim 
pilgrims to Mecca. Mahmud Gawan returned to die capital in 
1572 after an absence of over three years and was received with high 
honours. 

Before Mahmud Gawan’s return, news of a war of succession in 
Orissa, following the death of Kapilesvara Gajapati, reached 
Muhammad III in the form of an appeal for aid from Kapilesvara’s 
son Hambar (Hamvira) against an usurper named Mangal, by whom 


for Hambar. Hambar was to repay Malik Hasan later on when 
he helped him to reduce the Reddis of Rajahmundry and Konda- 
vidu. Malik Hasan’s achievements received due recognition when 
he returned to the capital, but Purushottama soon displaced 
Hambar and won the throne of Orissa for himself, Hambar con- 
senting to rule in Kimedi as a subordinate vassal. 

The Bahmanl kingdom now for the first time extended from 
sea to sea, and honours were fairly divided between the foreigners 
and Deccanis. Of the four provinces, two — Gulbarga with 
Bijapur, and Daulatabad — were held by Mahmud Gawan and 
Yusuf Adil Khan, both foreigners, and two others — Telengana and 
Berar — by Malik Hasan and Fathullah Imad-ul-Mulk, the other 
Brahmin youth from Vijayanagar. Fathullah was friendly with the 
foreigners, but not so Malik Hasan; Mahmud Gawan was relatively 
free from party spirit. The leader of the foreigners was Yusuf, 
and round him gathered many foreigners who enabled him to 
complete the conquest of northern Konkan. This earned for him 
higher honours than Hasan’s who thus became more hostile than 
ever to the foreigners. 

At the end of 1472 the rajas of Belgaum and Bankapur were 
urged by Viriipaksha of Vijayanagar to recover Goa for the Hindu 
empire. Muhammad III and Mahmud Gawa® marched against 
Bankapur, whose ruler Birkana wit' 


246 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

that the time had come for Purushottama to recover his lost terri- 
tory, so he invaded Telengana and besieged Malik Hasan in Rajah- 
mundry. Muhammad, however, marched across country and 
relieved him, the Orissan king retired to his country whither 
Muhammad followed him in 1478, when he had to make peace at 
the cost of many elephants and other rich presents to the sultan. 
Hamir, who had shut himself up in Kondavldu, eventually surren- 
dered and was spared his life. Muhammad destroyed the great 
temple at Kondavldu, built a mosque on its site, and earned for 
himself the title of ghazl by killing with his own hand the Brahmin 
priests of the temple. 

Muhammad now spent over three years in Telengana, com- 
pleting its subjugation. The province, which had grown adminis- 
tratively unwieldy because of the addition of so much newly- 
conquered territory, was divided into two, east and west, with 
capitals at Rajahmundry and Warangal. This was part of a general 
scheme of administrative reform planned by Mahmud Gawan ; but 


Telengana, resented the new scheme and resolved on the 
destruction of its author. 

Muhammad also planned an expedition against the eastern 
Carnatic ruled over by Saluva Narasimha, viceroy of Vijayanagar, 
who had helped Purushottama in the recent war. Malik Hasan 
offered to go with him, leaving his son Ahmad as his deputy in 
Rajahmundry. Ahmad, the better soldier, was then holding a 
fief in the Mahus district in Berar, evidently because it was felt 








Orissa telling him that the people of the Deccan were weary of 
Muhammad’s tyranny and perpetual drunkenness and urging him 
to invade the country. They placed the letter in the sultan’s hands 
pretending that they had intercepted the messenger who was 
carrying it. Mahmud Gawan was sent for at once; disregarding 
the remonstrances of friends who sought to dissuade him from 
obeying this unusual call and advised him to flee to Gujarat, the 
minister presented himself before the king. Muhammad Shah 
sternly asked him what punishment was proper for one whose trea- 
son against his sovereign was proved. ‘Death’ was the unhesitat- 


admitted that the seal was indeed his, but protested that he had not 
written the letter. The sultan paid no attention but ‘ordered his 
Abyssinian slave Jowhur to put the minister to death on the spot’, 
and so it was done (5 April 1481). Thus died the only counsellor 
of the Bahmanls who combined loyalty with an ability which entit- 
led him to the rank of a statesman, and who served his masters with 
unswerving devotion for thirty-five years. In private life, Mah- 
mud Gawan was simple, generous, charitable, learned and 
blameless, and he might have healed the feud between the 









Too late the sultan discovered the truth and sent the body of 
Gawan for burial with honour at Bidar. But the king was now 
feared and distrusted by all the foreigners and the respectable 
section of the Deccanis, who declined to have anything more to do 
with him, refused to attend court or camp and saluted him from a 
distance when they did so at all. 

The king was thus thrown into the hands of the betrayers of his 
late minister and had to make it up with them, instead of punishing 









BAHMANJS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 249 
twelve, by Malik Hasan, at a mean ceremony from which the 
nobility deliberately stayed away. Yusuf Adil Khan came back 
from Goa to Bidar to pay his respects to the new monarch, but 
suspicion and intrigue and the open fights between the Deccanis 
and his followers induced him to retire to Bijapur, leaving Malik 
Hasan supreme in the capital. An attempt by the boy-sultan to 
gain his freedom by having Malik Hasan assassinated failed, and he 
was more closely guarded ever after. It became well known that 
the king was a helpless prisoner, and the governors of provinces 
began to defy the orders of Malik Hasan, the malik naib. In i486, 
for instance, the governor of Telengana rebelled, and there were 
also revolts in Goa and Chakan supported by Yusuf Adil Shah. 
It was not long before the king openly expressed his disgust with 
Malik Hasan who thereupon left for Bidar with the intention of 
capturing the treasury and winning the army over to his side. He 
was caught, however, and, under the king’s orders, strangled by 
Dilpasand Khan, the governor of the city. But his removal came 
too late ; the king returned to Bidar and plunged into idleness and 
debauchery, neglecting public affairs. A conspiracy of the Decca- 
nis to dethrone him in November 1487 was foiled by the inter- 
cession of the foreign troops, and the Deccanis and Africans suffer- 
ed a terrible reprisal in the form of a general massacre which 
lasted three days. 

In 1490, at the suggestion of Malik Ahmad Nizam-ul-Mulk, 
the late Malik Hasan’s son, Yusuf Adil Khan of Bijapur and 
Fathullah ‘Imad-ul-Mulk of Berar joined him in assuming the 
royal title and announced themselves free from the suzerainty of 
Bidar. Their example was followed later by Qutb-ul-Mulk of 
Golconda ( 1 5 1 2) and Barid-ul-Mulk of Bidar itself. Such was the 
origin of the five kingdoms of the Nizam Shahis of Ahmadnagar, 
Adil Shahis of Bijapur, Imad Shahis of Berar, Qutb Shahis of 
Golconda, and Barid Shahis of Bidar. Ahmad’s motive was almost 
certainly disloyalty to the sultan who had ordered the murder of his 
father ; but the others set up their independence because they could 
no longer tolerate a king who allowed himself to be swayed by 
whichever ambitious minister held his favour at the moment. That 
post was then held by Quasim Barid who soon reduced Sultan 
Mahmud to greater impotence than ever, and some are inclined to- 
date the rise of the Barid Shahis from 1490. 

Quasim Barid sought to bring the provincial governors under 



250 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

control, and proceeded against Bijapur after inciting Narasa 
Nayaka, the regent of Vijayanagar, to attack it by invading the 
Raichur doab. He also expected Ahmad Shah to aid him, but was 
disappointed, and Yusuf gained a success against him. In 1493, 
Mahmud Begarha of Gujarat complained to the king of the Deccan 
against the piratical acts of his vassal Bahadur Gilani of Goa. In 
his attempts to reduce him, Quasim had the help of Yusuf, Ahmad 
and Fathullah, all of whom were interested in saving the Deccan 
from a Gujarati invasion. Bahadur was killed and his lands 
bestowed on ‘Ain-ul-Mulk Kanani, specially chosen by Quasim 
as likely to hold his own against Yusuf Adil. 

There is no need to pursue in detail the intrigues, rebellions 
and faction fights that marked the remaining years of Mahmud’s 
nominal rule. In 1504, Quasim Barid died and his place was taken 
by Amir Ali Barid who, in the midst of many vicissitudes, managed 
to retain control of the king and foil his efforts to secure his freedom. 
Mahmud died in December 1518, and was followed on the throne 
by his four sons: Ahmad (1518-21); Ala-ud-din (1521) who was 
deposed, imprisoned, and put to death for his attempt to get free 
of the control of Ali Band; Wali Ullah (1 521-4) who met the same 
fate after a nominal rule of three years; and Kalimullah. The 
last ruler sent a messenger to Babur promising to surrender the 
provinces of Daulatabad and Berar to him if he would rid the king 
of the Deccan of his jailor and restore tohim the restof his kingdom. 
No answer came; but Amir Ali Barid got scent of the mission, and 
Kalimullah fled to Bijapur in 1527. He was received coldly there, 
and so went to Ahmadnagar where he died soon afterwards. His 
body was sent to Bidar for burial. 

Such was the end of Bahmani rule, by no means an attractive 
chapter in the history of the country. Among the eighteen sultans 
of the line, there were few who were not drunkards and debauchees 
surrounded by informers and self-seekers. Faction and party 
strife dominated court-life and sometimes led to terrible blunders 
like the murder of Mahmud Gawan. Some of the kings were 
bigots, and none of them had any genuine sympathy for their 
subjects who were Hindus. Something was done to promote irriga- 
tion and agriculture, and though this was largely to increase the 
revenue to the crown, still it did good to the people as well. The 
Russian merchant Athanasius Nikitin who lived in Bidar for 
some time (1470-4) records: ‘The land is overstocked with people; 




BAHMANIS AND THE RISE OF VIJAYANAGAR 251 
but those in the country are very miserable, whilst the nobles are 
extremely opulent and delight in luxury. They are wont to be 
carried on their silver beds, preceded by some twenty chargers 
caparisoned in gold, and followed by 300 men on horseback, and 
by 500 on foot, and by horn men, ten torchbearers and ten musi- 
cians’. The army and its leaders often sucked the country dry, 
and the people were helpless against them. The wars with the 
neighbouring Hindu states, particularly Vijayanagar, were marked 
by sickening horrors, and there were occasions when several 
hundreds were made ‘converts’. Numbers of foreigners — Persians, 
Turks, Arabs and Moguls — came in search of trade or office, settled 
in the country and formed unions with the women of the land. 
All the same, the bulk of the population continued Hindu, and the 
number of Muslims in Hyderabad state today does not exceed 
fifteen per cent. 

The Bahmani sultans erected a number of well-designed for- 
tresses, and the cities of Gulbarga and Bidar owe their chief 
monuments to them and their ministers. The architecture of these 
buildings will be discussed in chapter XVI on ‘Art’. 

The history of the five separate kingdoms that arose out of the 
BahmanI kingdom need not be pursued in detail, and will only be 
touched on in the next chapter in so far as it concerns their relations 
with Vijayanagar. Golconda and Bijapur were the most impor- 
tant among them, and had a longer history than the rest. Muham- 
mad Kasim, better known by his surname Ferishta, wrote his 
celebrated history to the command of Ibrahim II of Bijapur (1580- 
1626). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

J. Briggs : History of the Rise of the Muhammadan Power in India (Ferishta), 
Vol. II, pp. 283-559 (Calcutta, 1909). 

Sir Wolsbley Haig: The Kingdom of the Deccan, 1347-1436 ( Cambridge 
History of India. Vol. III). 

J. S. King: The History of the Bahmani Dynasty (London, 1900). 

H K. Sherwani : Mahmud Gawan (Allahabad, 1942). 

M. S omasbkhara Sarma : A Forgotten Chapter of Andhra History (Madras, 
1945). 

N. Venkataramanayya : The Early Muslim Expansion in South India\ Madras, 
1942). 




252 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


BAHMANI KINGS OF THE DECCAN 



(12) Nizan! Shah (13) MuhaLmad III Jamshid . 
(1461-3) Lashkari (1463-82) 

(14) Mahmud (1482-1518) 


Ahmad 


(15) Ahmad (16) Ala-ud din 
(1518-21) (1521) 


(1 7) VVa!i Ullah (18) Kaliiiullah 
(1521-24) (1524-7) 



CHAPTER XII 

THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 

Harihara I — Bukka I — end of the Sultanate of Madura — Harihara II — 

Devaraya I— Ramachandra — Vijayaraya— Devaraya II — relations with the 
Reddis and the Gajapatis — Abdur Razzak — Bahmani wars — Vijayaraya II — 

Virupaksha II — Sajuva Narasimha. 







us that while sojourning at Kanchipuram after his conquest of the 
Sambuvaraya, Kampana dreamt that the goddess of the Pandya 
country described the pitiful state of that land under the Muslims 
and gave him a sword dispatched by Agastya — the sword of 
Pandyan sovereignty which the Pandyan kings were no longer 
capable of wielding. The Pandya’s failure to recover Madura is 
the historic justification for Kampana’s campaign against the 
Madura sultan which history places in the years from 1365 to 1370. 
The image of Ranganatha, which had been carried away from 
Srirangam for safety during the time of the Muslim inroads, was 
restored to its original place in 1371. Kampana died in 1374. 

The work begun by Harihara I was thus continued under 
Bukka I, and his sovereignty came to be recognized over large 
regions. The empire was divided into several rajyas ruled over 
by princes of the royal family or by highly favoured generals. 
Such were the Udayagiri rajya (Nellore and Cuddapah), Penugonda 
rajya (Bellary, Anantapur and parts of Northern Mysore), Mulvayi 
rajya (parts of Mysore, Salem and South Arcot districts), Araga or 
Maleha rajya (Banavasi, Chandragutti and Goa) and the Tulu 
rajya also called Barakur-Mangaluru rajya, besides the Raja- 
gambhira rajya and others in the south. 

Bukka I was followed on the throne by his son Harihara II 
who ruled for twenty-seven years (1377-1404) and consolidated 




two kingdoms were to be the same as before the war, and that each 
party was to refrain from molesting the subjects of the other. 
Widespread famine over a great part of the Deccan added to the 
sufferings of the people during this period. The tribute which 
Harihara promised to pay annually was withheld two years later 
when the Sultans of Malwa and Gujarat became his allies. 

When Harihara II died in August 1404 the succession was 
violently disputed between his surviving sons. At first Virupaksha 
succeeded in securing the throne, but was soon ousted by Bukka II 
who ruled for two years (1405-6). Finally, Devaraya I became 
king and celebrated his coronation on 5 November 1406. 









throne for a few months, and was then followed by his brother 
Vira Vijaya Raya. Towards the dose of Devaraya’s reign the 
Italian Nicolo Conti visited Vijayanagar and his description of the 
city has survived to this day. 

The duration of Vira Vijaya Raya’s reign has been variously 
estimated ; tentatively it may be said to have lasted for about five 
years (1422-6). Nuniz says he ‘did nothing worth recording’. 
His son, who in due course succeeded him as Devaraya II, was 
associated with him in the administration almost from the begin- 
ning. The traditional enmity with the Bahmanis continued, so it 
was not long before Ahmad Shah began a war against Vijaya and 
inflicted a defeat on his forces and great slaughter and destruction 
on the civil population of the country. The armies met on the 
banks of the Tungabhadra; Vijaya’scamp was surprised in the early 
morning and the king hurriedlymade his escape to a sugarcane plan- 
tation. He was found by the Muslim soldiers; but they mistook 
him for a common labourer and, when they came to know of the 
sultan’s victory, they left him and hastened to join their friends. 
Ahmad Shah then overran the open country, and ‘laying aside all 
humanity, whenever the number of the slain amounted to twenty 
thousand, he halted three days, and made a festival in celebration 
of the bloody work. He broke down the idol temples, and des- 
troyed the colleges of Brahmins.’ Before peace could be had. 


THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 259 

pati kingdom of Orissa, possibly because the conquest of Kondavidu 
brought Devaraya into conflict with Gajapati’s subordinates; but 
before hostilities could proceed, Allada Reddy of Rajahmundry 
intervened and brought about peace between the combatants. 
Allada died shortly after this and was succeeded by his sons AJlaya 
Verna and VIrabhadra who followed their father’s general policy 
of aggrandizement at the expense of Kalinga. The accession of 
Kapilesvara, an energetic ruler in Kalinga, in 1435, naturally 
resulted in a Gajapati invasion of the kingdom of Rajahmundry. 
The rulers of Rajahmundry sought help from the Vijayanagar 
ruler connected with them by ties of political and dynastic alliance. 
Devaraya II responded, and his troops drove the Kalinga army 
back and secured a temporary respite for the kingdom of Rajah- 
mundry until it was swallowed up by Kapilesvara after Devaraya 
II’s death. 

Devaraya also carried his arms into Kerala, subjugating the 
ruler of Quilon and other chieftains. The Zamorin of Calicut, 
however, seems to have continued to retain his independence. 
Abdur Razzak, the Persian ambassador who visited South India 
in this reign, states that although the Zamorin was not under 
Devaraya’s authority, he lived in great fear of him, and when he 
received a letter from the Vijayanagar monarch that the Persian 
ambassador should be sent to his court without delay he instantly 
carried out the order. The same writer bears testimony to the 
supremacy of Devaraya over the whole of South India, saying that 
his dominions extended from Ceylon to Gulbarga and from Bengal 
(Orissa) to Malabar. Nuniz asserts that Devaraya also exacted 
tribute from the rulers of Quilon, Ceylon, Pulicat, Pegu and 
Tenasserim and elsewhere. 

With the BahmanI kingdom, however, Devaraya’s relations 
continued to be hostile. Soon after his accession in 1436, sultan 
Ala-ud-din II sent his brother Muhammad against Vijayanagar 
to recover ‘the arrears of tribute’, and Devaraya had to pay a 
large amount. The Vijayanagar armies were so consistently 
defeated in their contests with BahmanI forces, that Devaraya held 
a council of his nobility to explore the causes of Muslim successes 
and devise means of counteracting them. As a result, Mussalmans 
were thenceforth eligible for service in his army and allowed the 
free exercise of their religion; a Koran was placed before his throne 
that they ‘might perform the ceremony of obeisance in his 



however, were taken prisoner until the sultan threatened a whole- 
sale massacre of the Hindu population if they were not released; 
and Devaraya did not feel strong enough to refuse the Sultan’s 

Devaraya was a great builder and a patron of poets. Himself a 
scholar and author, he is reputed to have presided with conspicuous 
success over many literary disputations. In one such, the Telugu 
poet Srinatha was held to surpass the poet-laureate who belonged 
to the celebrated Dindima family, and is said to have been bathed 
in a shower of golden tankas. 

His long, and generally prosperous, reign came to an end with 
his death in May 1446. He was succeeded by a Vijaya Raya II 
and then, very shortly after, by his own son Mallikarjuna who was 
crowned some time before May 1447. 

Mallikarjuna was weak and incompetent so that, from his 
accession, there began a period of dissension, decline and confusion 
until the strength of the empire was restored, over forty years later, 
by the martial ability and statesmanship of Saluva Narasimha. 
The interval is marked by much agitation, discontent, and opposi- 
tion to the members of the old royal famil y, several of whom met 
with violent deaths. At the start of his reign, the Velamas made 




THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 261 

a new home for themselves in Velugodu (Kumool district) when 
their capital Rajakonda was seized by the Bahmanls and the neigh- 
bouring princelings then disturbed the peace and weakened the 
realm — a situation of which both Ala-ud-din II and Kapilesvara 
Gajapati took advantage. They laid siege to Vijayanagar; but, 
true to its name, that city defied all their efforts to capture it and 
the invading armies had to retire without accomplishing much. 

Kapilesvara, however, kept up the war, capturing Rajahmundry 
and Kondavidu before 1454, being aided in his enterprise by the 
Kshatriya and Velama chieftains of Telengana. His conquests 
extended up to Sffsailam and included a large part of the Kumool 
district. He sent his son Hambar against Mahmud Gawan, whom 
he defeated, to capture Warangal in Telengana, and later, on 
Humayun’s death in 1461, Bidar. He then conquered Udayagiri 
in Nellore, and Kanchipuram and Trichinopoly in the southern 
provinces of the empire of Vijayanagar (1463). 

The Odda empire reached its greatest extent at this time, its 
influence being felt from the Ganges to the Kaveri. But unlike 
the Telugu districts, which became part of the empire of Orissa for 
some years, the southern lands did not pass out of the control of 
Vijayanagar, and the Oriya invasion of the South was only a sudden 
raid followed by speedy withdrawal. The sovereignty of Vijaya- 
nagar was upheld by its powerful nobles ruling in almost complete 
independence of the emperor Mallikarjuna; such were Saluva 
Gopa Timma, also known as Tirumalaideva Maharaja who held 
Trichinopoly, Tanjore and Pudukkottai, and Saluva Narasimha, 
equally prominent in the centre and in the eastern parts of the 
empire. The latter was assisted by Isvara, an able soldier of 
Tuluva extraction. Mallikarjuna died some time between June 
and October 1465. 

He left behind an infant son, Rajasekhara, but the throne was 
occupied by his cousin Virupaksha II. Virupaksha was the son 
of Pratapadevaraya, a younger brother of Devaraya II, and had 
been ruler of Penugonda for several years before he assumed the 
imperial crown. Nuniz records that ‘he was given over to vice, 
caring for nothing but women, and to fuddle himself with drink’. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that large tracts of land were lost to 
the Muslims including Goa, Chaul and Dabhol. The authority 
of the central government continued to decline, and total disruption 
was, once again, only prevented by the initiative of powerful 




that Narasimha helped Purushottama Gajapati to regain the 
throne of Orissa from which he had been expelled by Hambar with 
the aid of the Bahmani sultan Muhammad III. Narasimha and 
Purushottama had to face the hostility of that sultan, and the 
war that followed, in 1478-81, has been described in the last 
chapter. The Tuluva general ISvara particularly distinguished 
himself by recapturing much of the booty which the sultan had 
gathered by his daring raid on Kanchipuram. 

Virupaksha II continued to rule till the middle of 1485 when 
he was murdered by his eldest son. The parricide, however, 
declined the throne and had his younger brother, Padearao (Praud- 
hadevaraya), crowned king. The first act of the new king, how- 
ever, was to procure the assassination of the brother to whom he 
owed the throne, and then to plunge into debauchery and neglect 
the affairs of state. Saluva Narasimha saw that the only way to 
save the kingdom was to put an end to the old dynasty and to 
assume the royal title himself. He therefore commanded his 
general Narasa Nayaka to proceed against Vijayanagar and capture 
the city. ‘Nuniz gives us a graphic account of the last scenes; 
how Narasimha’s captain arrived at the city gates and found them 
undefended; how he penetrated the palace and found no one to 
oppose him; how he even went as far as the harem “slaying some 
of the women” ; and how at last the craven king fled.’ Thereupon 





THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 263 

Mysore, and others. He certainly overcame his internal troubles 
but they greatly weakened his capacity to resist his foreign enemies. 
For instance, when Purushottama Gajapati took advantage of the 
weakness of the BahmanI kingdom after the death of Muhammad 
III and conquered all the eastern coastal country south of Orissa up 
to the Gundlakamma river in the Nellore district by about 1489 
and even advanced to Udayagiri and laid siege to it; Narasimha’s 
attempt to raise the siege proved disastrous. Deteated in battle 
and taken prisoner, he only secured his release by agreeing to 
surrender the fort and the surrounding country. 

The loss of the western ports in the reign of Virupaksha II 
had dislocated the horse trade of the Arabs on which the Vijayana- 
gar army depended for its cavalry. Narasimha, however, revived 
the trade by conquering the Tulu country and manning the ports 
of Honavar, Bhattakkula (Bhatkal), Bakanur and Mangalore. ‘He 
caused horses to be brought from Ormuz and Aden into his kingdom, 
and thereby gave profit to the merchants, paying them for the 
horses just as they had asked’ (Nuniz). He also took steps to 
strengthen the efficiency and the martial spirit of his troops. 








He attacked Vijayanagar territory with a view to conquering the 
South (r. 1499). Narasa was quite equal to holding his own and the 
campaign ended without any marked gains to either side, and the 
boundary of the Gajapati kingdom continued to be to the south of 
the Krishna river. 

When Narasa Nayaka died in 1503, he could truthfully claim 
to have continued the work of his master Saluva Narasimha and to 
have imparted fresh strength to the empire. He had established 
its authority effectively over the whole of its extensive dominions 
and had reorganized the army. Indeed he may be said to have 
laid the foundations on which his talented son, Krishnadeva Raya, 
built the glorious age that followed. 

Immediately after his death, however, his place as regent was 
taken by his eldest son Immadi Narasa Nayaka, better known as 
VIra Narasimha. The lawful sovereign, Immadi Narasimha, 
continued to be kept under tutelage, though he must in fact have 
been old enough to look after affairs. He was finally assassinated 
early in 1505, and was shortly afterwards succeeded by VIra 
Narasimha, who thus inaugurated the third, or the Tuluva dynasty 
of the Vijayanagar kingdom. Nuniz notes that after Narasa’s death 
'the whole land revolted under its captains’, and the murder of the 
king and the following usurpation could not have made the position 
of VIra Narasimha any the easier. His six-year reign was almost 
wholly spent in fighting and success did not always attend him. 
Yusuf Add Khan again sought to extend his dominion beyond the 
Tungabhadra which he crossed to lay siege to Kurnool. Ramaraja 
of the Aravidu famdy and his son Timma stood by VIra Narasimha, 
forced the Add Khan to retire and, by pursuing the retreating army, 
inflicted a defeat upon it. They expelled the treacherous captain 
of Adoni, which they occupied and later received, along with the 
fortress of Kurnool, as fiefs from their grateful emperor. 






THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 267 

his bodily strength by hard physical exercise, he was a fine rider 
and his noble presence made a pleasant impression on all who came 
into contact with him. He often led his armies in person and 
exhibited great steadfastness and courage in the face of danger. 
He had great care for the welfare of the rank and file of the forces, 
and visited the wounded after each engagement and arranged for 
their proper care. He was loved and respected by all and was, 
says Paes, ‘gallant and perfect in all things’. 

At the time of Krishnadeva's succession, however, the condition 
of the empire was by no means reassuring. The rebel chieftain of 
Ummattur was contesting the lordship of the best part of the 
Mysore country; the Gajapatis of Orissa were in occupation of 
the north-eastern districts and Prataparudra was openly hostile 
and aggressive; and though the Bahmani kingdom had virtually 
split up into five separate states, still the Muslim pressure from the 
north, especially from Bijapur, continued unabated in its strength. 
There was also the newly-risen power of the Portuguese to contend 
with — a power which was rapidly establishing control over the 
routes and the maritime trade of the west coast and seeking pro- 
fitable political contacts with ‘the country powers’. Nevertheless, 
within ten short years Krishnadevasucceeded in firmly establishing 
the authority of Vijayanagar all over the country; there was no 
thought of revolt and no great discontent anywhere within his vast 
realm, and the Portuguese became his friends. 

His first task was to repulse the Bahmani forces which invaded 
his territory in pursuit of the policy of annual jihads resolved upon 
by Mahmud II in 1501. As usual, prominent Bahmani nobles 
assembled in Bidar and started with the Sultan Mahmud II on 
their annual raid into the Raya’s kingdom (1509); but they soon 
discovered that they were no longer free to plunder and ravage. 
The progress of the Muslim armies was checked at the unidentified 
town of Diwani where they were decisively defeated in the battle 
that followed. The sultan himself was thrown off his horse and 
sustained serious injuries from which he recovered only slowly, 
whereupon his nobles ‘folded up the carpet of contention 
and war’, and returned to Bidar. Krishnadeva pursued the retiring 
armies, particularly that of Yusuf Adil Khan, who turned round to 
oppose him near Kovilkonda and to lose his life in the battle 
that followed. The citadel of Kovilkonda became Krishnadeva’s 
before he returned to his capital. 



after Albuquerque had attacked and captured Goa at the end of 1510 
— the result of many months’ fighting during which the town changed 
hands several times between the Portuguese and Bijapur troops. 

After this preliminary canter against his foes, Krishnadeva 
spent some time in his capital reorganizing his army and converting 
the motley feudal levies into an effective fighting force. He then 
invaded the Raichur doab and took the Raichur fort, finding his 
opportunity in the differences that had arisen between Bijapur and 
the Bahmani sultan. Yusuf Adil Khan had been succeeded by his 
young son Ismail Adil Shah as nominal ruler in Bijapur, but Kamal 
Khan was all powerful and had his own designs on the throne; 
Kamal Khan also knew that Krishnadeva was friends with the 
Portuguese, and so the opposition from Bijapur to Krishna’s 
invasion on this occasion was very feeble. Kamal Khan was 
assassinated in May 1511 by a hireling employed by Ismail’s 
mother, which led to fresh troubles for Bijapur from Persian and 
Khurasani nobles who were the friends of the murdered regent. 




nagar of a fine image of Balakrishna. The sage Vyasaraya 
composed songs celebrating the occasion. 

Prataparudra’s attempt to raise the siege of Udayagiri resulted 
in defeat and the pursuit of the retiring forces up to Kondavldu. 
To the Vijayanagar army it was a triumphal march all the way, 
the smaller forts either submitting or being easily captured. Then 
began the siege of Kondavldu by Saluva Timmarasa and later the 
king. Being the chief city of the Gajapati dominions south of the 
Krishna river, it was strongly guarded and many chiefs of the 
kingdom were stationed in it. Only after many months, when many 
of its inmates had died of starvation, were the walls scaled and the 
garrison overcome. Many Oriya nobles, including a son and the 
wife of the Gajapati ruler, were taken captive, and the prisoners 
sent by road to Vijayanagar. 

Krishnadeva R3ya entrusted the administration of the district 
of Kondavldu to Saluva Timma before he and his queens 
proceeded to Amaravati to offer worship to Amaresvara. From 
there he went back to the capital after visiting Srisailam to make 
magnificent gifts to Mallikarjuna. 




270 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Soon he was on the march once more to join his army in the 
field, but he found time to visit the shrine of Narasimha at Ahoba- 
1 a m on his way to Vij ayavada, which was taken and made the advanc- 
ed base for further operations. A few miles to the north-west 
was Kondapalli, a strong and well-defended fort with lofty walls. 
Krishnadeva laid siege to it; an army sent for its relief by Prata- 
parudra was met on the banks of the Krishna and thoroughly 
defeated. The siege was then pressed for two months longer until 
the fortress surrendered. The seizure of many other forts in 
Telengana, and the occupation of large parts of the Nalgonda and 
Warangal districts then under the suzerainty of the Gajapati, 
speedily followed. 

This campaign effectively completed the conquest of Telengana. 
Krishnadeva next turned his attention to the country of Kalinga 
proper where Rajamahendravaram (Rajahmundry) was one of the 
first cities to be taken. A few feeble attempts were made to stop 
its progress, but the Vijayanagar army continued its triumphal 
march, devastating the territory of the Gajapati all along the road, 
up to Potnur-Simhadri. There Krishnadeva set up a pillar of 
victory and then returned to his capital by way of Rajahmundry 
(1516). His invading and victorious army pressed on, however, 
marched further into Kalinga until its capital, Cuttack, was reached. 
Reduced to extremity, Prataparudra sued for peace and offered 
the emperor the hand of his daughter which was accepted. 
Krishnadeva, indeed, was magnanimous and returned all the 
territory north of the Krishna. 

While Krishnadeva was busy with his Orissa campaign (which 
may be called one of the most brilliant military episodes in the 
history of sixteenth-century India), Ismail Adil Khan recaptured 
Raichur. Krishnadeva’s campaign for its recovery (1520) is 
described by Nuniz. Determined to try conclusions once for all 
with the Adil Shah, Krishnadeva marched against him with an 
army consisting ‘of about a million of men, if the camp-followers 
be included’ and over five hundred elephants; he pitched his 
camp to the east of Raichur and began a regular siege of the fortress. 
Ismail came to its relief with strong contingents of cavalry and 
advanced to within nine miles of Raichur where he entrenched him- 
self, leaving the Krishna river about five miles behind. The 
decisive battle was joined on the morning of 19 May 1520. It 
opened with a frontal attack by the Vijayanagar troops which 




THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 271 

drove the Muslims back to their trenches; but then the artillery 
of the Muslims came into play and wrought much havoc among 
the close ranks of the Hindus who fell back and were charged by the 
enemy. Krishnadeva, who was in command of the second line, 
then mounted his horse and ordered a forward movement of the 
remaining divisions. Their impetuous onslaught overcame and 
scattered the ranks of the Muslim forces who were relentlessly 
pursued right up to the river, and the threatened defeat was con- 
verted into brilliant victory. The Shah’s camp was seized and he 
himself barely escaped with his life on an elephant. ‘The spoil 
was great and the result decisive.’ The sultan of Bijapur thence- 
forth cherished a wholesome dread of Krishnadeva Raya and did not 
venture to renew the contest during his lifetime. Krishnadeva 
returned to Raichur and shortly afterwards recaptured it. Its fall 
was in large measure due to the assistance rendered by some Portu- 
guese soldiers with Christovao de Figueiredo at their head; with 
their arquebuses they ‘picked off the defenders from the walls’ 
and enabled the besiegers ‘to approach the lines of fortification and 
pull down the stones of which they were formed’. The Portuguese 
commander was specially honoured by the king in the next 
Mahanavami festival in the capital. 

This resounding success against the Adil Shah had important 
political results. Krishnadeva personally became haughty and 
made provocative demands on his defeated foe ; he kept his ambas- 
sador waiting at Vijayanagar for over a month and then sent word 
that if the Adil Shah would come and kiss his foot in obeisance, his 
lands and fortresses would be restored to him. The Muslim 
sultans saw the danger to their position in the rising military 
strength of Vijayanagar and in its capacity to interfere in their 
affairs, which led, by and by, to more concerted action on their 
part aganist Vijayanagar. Lastly, the Portuguese on the coast 
gained by the result of the battle of Raichur : ‘Goa rose and fell 
simultaneously with the rise and fall of the third Vijayanagar 
dynasty; and necessarily so, considering that its entire trade 
depended on Hindu support’. 

The machinations of one Asad Khan Lari, a wily courtier of 
Ismail Shah who had been sent to Vijayanagar to conclude a treaty, 
led Krishnadeva into yet another campaign against Bijapur in 1523. 
According to Asad Khan’s undertaking, the Adil Khan or his 
mother would meet Krishnadeva at a certain point on the northern 





he made his six-year-old son king, and himself took up the post 
of minister. As he was by no means an old man at the time, being 
only a little over forty, it is thought that he may have contracted 
some malady which he knew would shorten his life. The en- 
thronement of the boy-king, however, meant a lowering of the 
position of the ambitious and unscrupulous Saluva Timma, who 
contrived to have the prince poisoned. When Krishnadeva Raya 
came to know of it, though himself in a dying condition at the 
time, he sent for the minister, accused him in open court of the 









He respected all sects of the Hindu religion alike, though his 
personal leanings were in favour of Vaishnavism. Krishna Raya’s 
kindness to the fallen enemy, his acts of mercy and charity 
towards the residents of captured cities, his great military prowess 
which endeared him alike to his feudatory chiefs and to his 
subjects, the royal reception and kindness that he invariably 
bestowed upon foreign embassies, his imposing personal 
appearance, his genial outlook and polite conversation which 
distinguished a pure and dignified life, his love for literature 
and for religion, and his solicitude for the welfare of his people, 
and, above all, the almost fabulous wealth that he conferred as 
endowments on temples and Brahmins, mark him out indeed as 
the greatest of the South Indian monarchs’. 

Krishnadeva Raya was a great builder and added much to the 
beauty and amenities of the capital. At the beginning of his reign 
he built a nev/gopura (tower) and repaired another in the temple of 
Virupaksha. In 1513, as already mentioned, he erected the shrine 
of Krishnasvami to house worthily the image of Balakrishna he had 
brought from Udayagiri. With the aid of a Portuguese engineer, 
whose services he borrowed from the Governer-General of Goa, 
he improved the irrigation of the dry lands round about Vijayana- 
gar. He added a beautiful suburb to the capital on its southern 
approaches, and called it Nagalapur in honour of his mother 
Nagala Devi ; the new city’s water supply came from the new tank 



274 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

which was under construction at the time Paes visited the city. 
The temple of Vitthalasvami on the river bank was also embellished 
by Krishna Raya; it marks the extreme limit in the ‘florid 
magnificence’ to which the Vijayanagar style advanced. Work 
on it continued for many years afterwards, and was perhaps 
only stopped when the Mussalmans destroyed the city in 1565. 
The enormous statue of Narasimha, hewn out of a single boulder of 
granite, that lay near the south-western angle of the Krishnasvami 
temple was one of the latest monuments of the reign (1528). 
Though much mutilated, it is still a striking object amongst the 
ruins of the city. 

Nuniz, who spent some time in Achyuta Raya’s court, affirms 
that the new king gave himself over to vice and tyranny, that he 
lacked honesty and courage, and that the people and captains of 
the kingdom were much discontented with his evil life and inclina- 
tions. Achyuta does not, in fact, appear to have been such a bad 
monarch. He was specially chosen by Krishnadeva for the succes- 
sion in preference to his infant son who was only eighteen months 
old. Yet it cannot be denied that his position was difficult at the 
time of his accession ( 1 529). The infant son of Krishna Raya was 
proclaimed king by Rama Raya; but Rama’s attempt to seize power 
in the name of the infant was foiled by Saluva Vira Narasimha 
who kept the throne vacant for Achyuta till he could come up from 
Chandragiri where he had been confined by Krishnadeva Raya, 
along with other princes of the family, in order to secure the peace 
of the realm. On his way to Vijayanagar, Achyuta Raya held two 
coronations, one at Tirupati and the other Kalahasti, in an attempt 
to forestall Rama Raya’s efforts to enthrone another king. 

Krishnadeva’s death was the signal for all the enemies of 
Vijayanagar to renew their attacks on that kingdom. Ismail Adil 
Khan once again invaded the Raichur doab and seized Raichur 
and Mudgal, before Achyuta could do any thing to prevent it. 
(This is almost the only occurrence of the entire reign noticed by 
Nuniz.) The Gajapati ruler, however, who led an invasion at the 
same time was defeated and turned back; so also the sultan of 
Golconda, Quli Qutb Shah, whose attempt to seize Kondavidu was 
likewise foiled. 

When he finally reached Vijayanagar, Achyuta came to terms 
with Rama Raya and agreed to share the power with him. This 
greatly displeased Saluva Vira Narasimha who retired from the 



THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 275 

court and set up the standard of revolt in the south with the aid of 
the chieftains of Ummattur and the Tiruvadi-rajya in south 
Travancore. Achyuta Raya marched against them, with an army 
commanded by his brother-in-law Salakaraju Tirumala. The 
campaign was one victorious progress up to the banks of the 
Tambrapami where a piller of victory was set up. The Pandya 
ruler who had suffered at the hands of the rebels was restored to 
his kingdom and his daughter accepted as the emperor’s bride. 
Saluva Vira Narasimha and his allies were not only defeated in 
battle but captured and brought as prisoners to the king’s camp 
at Srirangam. Achyuta returned to his capital via Ummattur to 
receive the submission of local chieftains on the way. 

When Krishnadeva Raya’s infant son died soon afterwards, 
Rama Raya’s position was considerably weakened. It brought 
about a change in Achyuta Raya’s attitude who advanced his own 
powers still further by invading that much disputed territory, the 
Raichur doab, and subduing the Bijapur country as far north as the 
Krishna. This was possible because Ismail Adil Khan’s death, 
in 1534, left the Bijapur throne to his unpopular son Mallu Adil 
Khan. The nobility rose against him at the instance of the 
notorious Asad Khan Lari, and Achyuta was not slow to take 
advantage of the situation, with Mallu consenting to make peace 
on Achyuta’s terms. 

The history of the subsequent years is obscure. A rebellion in 
Gutti seems to have been suppressed in 1536-7, after which he 
paid a visit to Tirupati with his officers. Rama Raya was strength- 
ening his position by removing old servants and appointing his own 
relatives and friends in their place. He also took into his service 
3,000 Muslim soldiers whom Ibrahim Adil Khan, the new sultan 
of Bijapur, had dismissed from his service on his accession in 1535. 
He then made bold to seize Achyuta when he returned to the 
capital, kept him imprisoned and proclaimed himself king; but the 
opposition of the nobles forced him to abandon the scheme, 
enthrone Sadasiva, a nephew of Achyuta, and carry on the govern- 
ment in his name. This went on until rebellions in the south 
forced Rama Raya to leave the capital when he put Achyuta into 
the charge of a trusted servant. The campaign in the south was 
no unalloyed success, and lasted longer than Rama Raya had ex- 
pected. Meanwhile, the trusted servant in charge of Achyuta set 
him free and assumed the office of chief minister. He was soon 






276 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

done away with by Salakaraju Tirumala, however, who took the 
direction of affairs into his hands. These occurrences made it 
expedient for Rama Raya to patch up his quarrels with the rebels in 
the south and return to the capital. 

Troubles come not singly and Ibrahim Adil Khan chose this 
moment to march against Vijayanagar and lay siege to it. He entered 
Nagalapur and ‘razed it to the ground’ perhaps by way of reprisal 
for the treatment of Bijapur by Krishnadeva Raya. Both Achyuta 
and Rama Raya were afraid of Ibrahim joining forces with the 
other party, while the machinations of the wily Asad Khan brought 
about an invasion of Bijapur by the sultan of Ahmadnagar. Ibrahim 
opened negotiations with both the Hindu princes and settled their 
quarrel before he retired to his own territory. It was agreed that 
Achyuta would be king, but Rama Raya was to be free to rule his 
estate without interference. Ibrahim was richly rewarded with 
large sums of money for his service, and the terms of the compact 
were observed by both parties till the death of Achyuta in 1542. 

The whole of Achyuta Raya’s reign was spent in a struggle 
against adverse conditions created by internal revolts, foreign 
aggression and the intrigues and ambitions of Rama Raya. Trade 
everywhere was hampered and pilgrim traffic suffered from the 
activities of bandits who infested if they did not control the high- 
ways. Achyuta put up a brave fight against his many difficulties 
and does not merit the harsh judgement passed on him by Nuniz 
and others who have accepted a low estimate of his character. His 
life forms the subject of an ornate poem in Sanskrit, the Achyu- 
tarayabhyudaya, by the court-poet Rajanatha Dindima, written 
during the life time of the monarch: even after making all possible 
allowances for the intemperate eulogies which the poem contains, 
we can still sense that Achyuta had uncommon and praiseworthy 
characteristics. 

Meanwhile, both during the reign of Achyuta Raya and in the 
period that followed, the Portuguese had been busily establishing 
their empire on the coasts of South India, building forts wherever 
the protection of their trade demanded them. Wars with the 
Zamorin of Calicut and other feudatories of the empire were 
frequent, though they still kept up the appearance of friendly 
relations with the emperor himself. They acted throughout as if 
they had ‘a divine right to the pillage, robbery, and massacre of 
the natives of India. Not to mince matters, their whole record is 






THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 277 

one of a series of atrocities.’ They delighted particularly in 
plundering all rich temples within their reach, even Tirupati not 
escaping their predatory attentions (1545). 

Visvanatha Nayaka, son of Nagama Nayaka, was regarded by 
his descendants in later times as the founder of the celebrated 
Nayak dynast}' of Madura. He must have followed Achyuta in his 
southern campaign and fought in the wars against Saluva VIra 
Narasimha, Tiruvadi and others, until he w 7 as finally appointed 
representative of the emperor in the Pandya country. He was 
governor of the Madura country from 1533 to the end of Achyuta’s 
reign (1542) when he gave place to another officer. There is 
nothing to show that he established the separate Nayak kingdom of 
Madura; that came later and may have been the work of his son 
Krishnappa. 

Achyuta Raya was succeeded by his son Venkata I, but as he 
was not yet of age, his maternal uncle Salakaraju Tirumala became 
regent despite the opposition of the nobles. The queen-mother, 
Varadadevi, suspected her brother’s motives and sought the assist- 
ance of the Adil Khan ; but Tirumala bought off the sultan when he 
was already on his way to Vijayanagar. As a counter-move Rama 
Raya now liberated Sadasiva from prison at Gutti, proclaimed him 
emperor, and in his turn appealed to Bijapur for aid. Nothing 
loth, the Adil Khan invaded Vijayanagar, but Tirumala, who had 
been proclaimed king by the bewildered citizens of the capital, 
inflicted such a defeat on the Shah that he had to turn back. 
Tirumala’s next step to clear his path of all rivals was to cause Ven- 
kata I and all the members of the royal family to be assassinated. 
Thereafter the tyranny became so intolerable that the nobles once 
again invited the Bijapur sultan to come to their rescue. He came, 
but his overweening pride aroused hatred all round, and he went 
back in fear of his own safety. Rama Raya moved at last to seize 
the kingdom in the name of Sadasiva; he captured Penugonda, 
defeated Tirumala in a series of battles, and put him to the sword 
in a final engagement on the banks of the Tungabhadra and then 
proceeded to Vijayanagar to perform the coronation of Sadasiva 
(1543)- 

For the first seven or eight years after his coronation Sadasiva 
was the only king; but the real power was always in Rama Raya’s 
hands and in due course Rama Raya assumed the royal titles. 
Sadasiva was kept under close guard, although Rama Raya and his 




off one against another, hoping thus to keep them weak and to 
increase his own power. The Muslim rulers, needless to say, saw 
clearly what was happening and closed their ranks; and Rama Raya 
paid heavily for his miscalculations. His policy opened the direct 
road to the disaster of Rakshasi-Tangdi (Talikota). 

Soon after Sadasiva’s coronation, Rama Raya was once again 
called away to the south. His opponents, who could not bear to 
see him established at the head of the state, sought to defy his 



which they had been suffering for many years. The Franciscan 
friars and Jesuits were busy demolishing temples and building 
churches in the coastal cities, and the Portuguese governor of Goa 
was reported to be organizing a plundering raid against the rich 
temples of Kanchlpuram. The presence of many petty local 
rulers, their mutual jealousies and negotiations with the Portuguese 
further complicated a tangled situation. 

At this juncture Rama Raya ordered his cousin China Timma 




THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 279 

to lead a large array south and evolve order out of this chaos. 
Chandragiri was first wrested from the rebels; then the Chola 
country was entered and the fort of Bhuvanagiri stormed. March- 
ing thence along the coast, the expedition reached the port of 
Nagore where a temple of Ranganatha which had suffered ruin at 
the hands of the Catholics was restored. The Kaveri was crossed 
and the local chiefs of Tanjore and the Pudukkottai territory were 
reduced to subjection and arrears of tribute taken from them. 
Farther south still, the displaced Pandya was restored to his king- 
dom and the pride of Bettumperumal, the chief of Kayattar and 
Tuticorin, crushed. The forces of the ‘Five Tiruvadis’ of Travan- 
core were met at Tovala Pass, beaten and dispersed; the rest of 
Travancore was invaded and its defeated ruler (Tniquitibirim’) 
was received into favour and set to rule over much of the territory 
that had earlier been his. China Timma worshipped at the shrine 
of Padmanabha at Trivandrum, set up a pillar of victory at Cape 
Comorin and then returned to the capital leaving his brother 
Vitthala, who had rendered yeoman service throughout the cam- 
paign, in charge of the conquered territory. 

With the Portuguese, Rama Raya’s relations were by no means 
always friendly, and the advent of Martin Affonso de Sousa as 
governor of Goa in 1542 brought about a change for the worse. 
He attacked and plundered the port of Bhatkal soon after he came to 
Goa, and his activities on the Coromandel Coast have been noticed 
above. With his successor, Joao de Castro, Rama Raya concluded 
a treaty in 1547 by which he secured the monopoly of the horse 
trade. There followed some years of friendship and peace until, 
in 1558, Rama Raya made a sudden attack on San Thome. He 
had received complaints of the destruction of temples by Roman 
Catholic monks and, being persuaded that the inhabitants were 
possessed of vast riches, he thought he could both defend his religion 
and refill his treasury at one stroke. He demanded a tribute of 
1,00,000 pagodas, half to be paid immediately and the rest a year 
later, for which five hostages were taken from among the chief 
citizens. At about the same time, to prevent help reaching San 
Thome, Goa also was attacked by Vitthalaraya, Rama Raya’s 
cousin, aided by the Ikkeri chieftain Sankanna Nayaka. In spite 
of these setbacks, the Portuguese continued their depredations 
along the Malabar coast in the succeeding years. 

We must now turn to the details of Rama Raya’s relations with 




were turned back by the generalship of the Keladi chief Sadasiva 
Nayaka. In 1548 Rama Raya aided Burhan Nizam Shah in the 
capture of the fort of Kalyani from Bidar, and the fort remained in 
Burhan’s possession till his death in 1553. His son, Husain 
Nizam Shah, entered into an alliance with Ibrahim Qutb Shah of 
Golconda, renewed the war with Bijapur and laid siege to Gulbarga 
in 1557. Ibrahim Adil Shah called on Rama Raya for help and he 
promptly responded by marching in person at the head of his army. 
Anxious to avoid bloodshed, Rama Raya brought about a meeting 
of all the parties at the junction of the Bhima and Krishna rivers 
which resulted in a treaty of mutual alliance and protection by 
which, if any one of the contending parties became the victim of an 
unjust attack, the others were to join him against the aggressor — a 
plan of collective security as it would now be called. 

Ibrahim Adil Shah died soon after this meeting of the four kings 
and was succeeded by his young son Ali Adil Shah. An unusual step 
was taken by Ali to cement his friendly relations with Vijayanagar, 
says Ferishta. Rama Raya lost a son about this time, and Ali went 
to Vijayanagar to offer his condolence in person. He was received 
with the greatest respect, and Rama Raya’s wife adopted the sultan 
as her son. When, however, Ali took his leave after a stay of three 
days, Rama Raya failed to attend him out of the city, and Ali 
‘treasured up the affront in his mind’. Rama Raya, perhaps, on his 
part felt that the fortunes of Bijapur must have sunk rather low that 
its sultan should so far humble himself to secure his friendship. 

The first of the high contracting parties to disregard the Four 
Kings’ Peace was Husain Nizam Shah who invaded Bijapur in 
1560. Ali fled to Vijayanagar and implored the assistance of Rama 
Raya, who responded to the appeal and also called upon Ibrahim 
Qutb Shah of Golconda to fulfil his part according to the treaty. 
He did so with reluctance, but at the approach of the combined 
forces, the Nizam Shah retreated into his dominions and made over 


the Qutb Shahi court of Golconda, he had a first-hand knowledge 
of the internal conditions of that kingdom, and had friends among 
the nobles of that court. With Ibrahim Qutb Shah his relations 
were at first friendly as he had received him with favour when he fled 
to Vijayanagar from his brother’s wrath and helped him to gain the 
throne when that brother died (1550). But gradually their con- 
flicting interests drove them apart, and Ibrahim co-operated in the 
war against Ahmadnagar only in a half-hearted manner. Later, 
he openly allied himself with Ahmadnagar, went against Bijapur 
and laid siege to Kalyani. Rama Raya went to the relief of the 
fortress and ordered at the same time an invasion of the southern 
districts of the Golconda kingdom led by his brother Venkatadri. 
Thereupon the allied sultans retreated from Kalyani ; Rama Raya 
pursued the Nizam Shah while the Bijapur troops chased the Qutb 
Shah. Ahmadnagar was besieged a second time by Vijayanagar 
forces, but now without success as the flooding of the adjacent 
river compelled the invading army to retire with losses. Ibrahim 
Qutb Shah was defeated in battle, and reached his capital with 
difficulty, where he found everything in disorder owing to Venka- 
tadri’s invasion. Soon Rama Raya also returned from Ahmadnagar 




282 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Shah, who had suffered most, perhaps took the lead in the formation 
of the confederacy against Vijayanagar. Ferishta avers that the 
excesses committed by the Hindu forces against the Muslim 
population and sacred places in their invasions of Ahmadnagar and 
Golconda had no small share in rousing feeling against Rama Raya. 
Accordingly embassies passed to and fro among the sultans, their 
differences were made up, and steps taken to form a general league 
of the faithful against the Hindu monarch. Dynastic marriages 
cemented the political alliance between Ahmadnagar and Bijapur 
— Ali Add Shah marrying Chand Bibi, the daughter of Husain 
Nizam Shah, and Husain’s eldest son marrying one of Ali’s sisters 
at the same time. Soon after the marriages, preparations began for 
the holy war. Hindu sources generally speak of all the five sultans 
as the opponents of Rama Raya, though Muslim historians leave 
the sultan of Berar out of account. Ali Adil Shah clearly played 
a double game throughout, professing friendship with both 
the parties. The Muslim armies met on the plains of Bijapur and 
began their march to the south towards the end of 1564. 

Rama Raya knew that the decisive trial of strength was to begin 
soon, and, on Vijayadasami day (15 September 1564), he informed 
the nobles of the impending war and ordered them to gather 
together all their available strength without delay. Though little 
reliance can be placed on the large figures given by several writers, 
there is no doubt that very large numbers of troops were engaged on 
both sides. The Muslims reached Talikota, a small fortress- 
town in the neighbourhood of the Krishna river, on 26 December 
1564. Rama Raya faced the situation with the utmost confidence. 
He first sent his brother Tirumala with a considerable force of all 
arms to guard the Krishna and prevent the enemy from crossing it. 
Then he sent up his other brother, Venkatadri, and finally himself 
came up with the rest of the forces of the empire. The Hindu 
camp was on the south side of the Krishna, while the Muslims 
occupied both banks. Several partisan accounts have been written 
of the antecedents of the decisive engagement and of that engage- 
ment itself, but it is by no means easy to reconstruct the exact 
course of events. The actual field of battle was on the south bank 
of the Krishna; but as the two villages of Rakshasi and Tangdi, 
ten miles apart on its north bank, lie much nearer the field than 
Talikota, some historians refer to the battle as Rakshasi-Tangdi 
rather than Talikota. 





capital. The road to the great city lay open ; first to enter it were the 
dejected soldiers and princes from the field bringing the bad news ; 
but Tirumala made good his escape with all the treasures of the 
emperor loaded on to one thousand five hundred and fifty elephants. 
He left the city and its inhabitants to their fate, taking with him only 
the captive emperor Sadasiva and the women of the royal family. 

The victorious army was preceded by hordes of robbers and 



ur and brought about the retreat of the Adil Shah fromVij 
(1567). Soon Tirumala was called upon to join the Ni 
and Qutb Shah against Bijapur and did so; but the Adil i 



THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 285 

of the south and made them his friends. The Vodeyars of Mysore 
and the Nayaks of Vellore and Keladi still owned allegiance as 
before. He set up each of his three sons as viceroy over a linguistic 
area for general control and supervison : Sriranga, the eldest, over 
the Telugu area with Penugonda as his capital; Rama, his second 
son, over the Kannada country, to rule from Srirangapattana ; 
and Venkatapati, the youngest, to rule over the Tamil country from 
Chandragiri. He assumed the title ‘Reviver of the Decadent 
Karnataka Empire’ and had himself crowned emperor in 1570. 
But he was already an old man, and seems to have retired after a 
short rule, and been succeeded by Sriranga in 1572. Tirumala’s 
work restored the empire, though in a truncated form, and pro- 
longed its life for about a century. 

The fate of Sadasiva is uncertain. Caesar Frederick heard in 
1567 that he was assasinated by one of Tirumala’s sons, but this 
may only have been scandal spread against the new ruling house of 
Aravldu by its enemies. It seems as probable that Sadasiva, being 
a docile prince whom no one would have troubled to kill, may have 
languished in prison until he died in natural death. His name 
occurs in inscriptions till 1576. 

Sriranga I began to rule in 1572 though his father continued to 
live in retirement for some six years longer. He carried on the 
work of restoration, but there were many obstacles in his way. In 
addition, two of his Muslim neighbours continued their invasions, 
resulting in loss of territory. In 1576, Ali Adil Shah sent out an 
army from Adoni to lay siege to Penugonda. Sriranga entrusted the 
defence to his capital to his able general Chennapa and went off to 
Chandragiri with the treasures. Penugonda stood a three months’ 
siege, which gave Sriranga time to appeal successfully for help 
to Golconda and he himself took steps to send relief to Chennapa. 
He bought over one of the Adil Shah’s Hindu lieutenants and 
thus enabled Chennapa to inflict a defeat on the sultan on 21 
December 1576, after which he retired into his own territory. 
But within three years, Ibrahim Qutb Shah forgot his recent 
alliance with Sriranga and invaded his territory: quite likely he 
was in league with some of the discontented nobles of Vijayanagar 
and chose his opportunity for aggrandizement. The rich temple 
of Narasimha at Ahobalam was plundered in 1 579 by Murhari Rao, 
a Maratha Brahmin in the service of Golconda, and much territory 
was captured and ravaged although it was later recovered. 



286 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

The Golconda ruler returned to the charge and invaded the 
Kondavidu territory. There were struggles round the forts of 
Yinukonda, Kondavidu and Udayagiri, and though inscriptions say 
that Sriranga took these forts, the truth seems to be that Ibrahim 
gained considerable success and took much territory from Vyaya- 
nagar on this occasion which the Hindu empire never recovered. 
Sri ranga’s failure was due to the virtual division of the empire which 
limited the resources at his command, since his brothers gave him 
little aid. The dissensions among the nobles, which led to many 
petty fights and wars and intrigues with the enemy, weakened the 
defence still further. When Sriranga died without issue in 158s, 
his younger brother Venkata succeeded him, superseding the two 
sons of his elder brother Rama who had been viceroy of Sriranga- 
pattana under Tirumala. These two boys were young at a time 
when strong rule was needed. The nobles, therefore, headed by 
Taggadevaraya, chose Venkata to rule, and he fulfilled their ex- 
pectations in an ample measure. He celebrated his coronation in 
1585-6 and his reign of twenty-eight years was marked by a revival 
of strength and prosperity in the empire. He dealt successfully 
with the perennial trouble from the Muslim rulers of the Deccan, 
controUed the internal disorders effectively, and promoted the 
economic revival of the country. 

Venkata’s first act was an effort to get back the territory lost to 
Golconda by his predecessor. In that kingdom, Ibrahim had 
been succeeded at his death in 1580 by his son Muhammad Quli 
Qutb Shah. Venkata stirred up trouble against him in the Konda- 
vidu territory, and Quli retaliated effectively by seizing the whole of 
Kurnool and parts of the Cuddapah and Anantapur districts, and 
by marching on and laying siege to Penugonda itself. Venkata 
thereupon sued for a truce, and the sultan satisfied with the results 
attained, retired from the vicinity of Penugonda. Venkata made 
good use of the respite thus gained, and in a few days equipped the 
city to stand a long siege, and once more began to defy the Muslims. 
Sultan Quli discovered his mistake when he renewed the siege; he 
was defeated; and the approach of the rains, with the prospect of 
floods in the Krishna cutting off his retreat, forced him to raise the 
siege and go back, after making some hasty arrangements for the 
administration of the territory newly taken by him. But Venkata 
soon recaptured Gutti and then laid siege to Gandikota; he inter- 
cepted and scattered the forces sent to its relief from Kondavidu, 


THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 287 

while another Golconda army, led by Rustam Khan, was defeated 
and cut to pieces on the banks of the Penner, and Gandikota fell. 
This was followed by the seizure of other forts, and the Golconda 
garrisons were chased across the Krishna which later came to be 
recognized officially by Quli as the boundary of Vijayanagar. 
Farther east, Udayagiri became part of Venkata’s dominions before 
1589, but the Kondavidu territory was still the sultan’s. Internal 
troubles prevented the completion of Venkata’s designs against 
Golconda. 

His accession brought about no change in the quarrelsome ways 
of the nobles, and much of his time and energy was taken up with 
calling them to order. For instance, Tammaya Gauda rebelled in 
the Kolar region; he was soon quelled and tribute levied from him. 
A more serious revolt, however, occurred in Rayalaslma, or the 
Ceded Districts, to give them their modem name. In 1597-8, 
Nandela Krishnamaraya and a number of other chieftains defied 
imperial authority; Krishnama was defeated in a battle at Jambu- 
lamadugu and shut himself in the fort of Nandela (Nandyal). 
Venkata invested it for three months, after which Krishnama 
surrendered to spend the rest of his life in prison in Chandragiri. 
Kandanavolu Gopalaraju, the grandson of Venkatapati, the brother 
of Rama Raya, and other rebels, were dealt with suitably at the 
same time with the aid of loyal lieutenants who were adequately 
rewarded from the rebels’ estates after they had been put down. 
There were troubles also in the Tamil country where Lingama 
Nayak of Vellore headed the revolt. Yachama Nayudu, son of 
Velugoti Kasturi Rangappa, was set up in the amaram (fief) of 
Perumbedu sima (Chingleput and Madurantakam taluqs) to act 
as a check on Lingama. Yachama took the important stronghold 
of Uttiramerur from Naga, a subordinate of Linga, who now 
summoned to his aid not only his own subordinates from the 
neighbouring fortresses, but the Nayaks of Gingee, Tanjore and 
Madura. They were not loth to aid in curbing the reviving power of 
the emperor. A huge army was collected and sent in May 1601 
against Uttiramerur under the lead of Davula Papa Nayudu, 
brother-in-law of Naga. Nothing daunted, Yachama took up the 
challenge, ably seconded by his younger brother Singa; in the battle 
that followed Papa was slain and the others fled or became captives. 
Yachama’s success was complete and was warmly recognized by the 
emperor. But Linga and his allies did not give in. Venkata 



288 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

defeated Linga near Vellore, advanced into the Chola country where 
he inflicted another defeat on the rebels, and crossing the Kaven 
laid waste the lands of the Madura Nayak. This senes of victones 
broke the back of the Tamil rebeUion, and all the rebels submitted, 
except Linga, who trusted to the strength of the fortress of Vellore. 
In due course this fortress also was taken and thereafter made the 
seat of the empire, while Linga was deprived of his estate. 

Venkata did much to restore the prosperity of the villages in 
the northern districts which had suffered greatly from repeated 
Muslim inroads after 1565. Easy conditions of land tenure were 
offerd to the farmers by the king and the nobles, who followed his 
example, so that the ryots returned to their wonted occupation. 
He also strove to sustain the failing strength of the village assemb- 
lies, and to administer impartial justice. Venkata’s rule of nearly 
thirty years undoubtedly saved the empire from the imminent 
dissolution. He died in 1614 after nominating Sriranga, his 


nephew, as his successor. , , . . 

It was during the reign of Venkata that the Dutch and the 
English began to establish themselves on the east coast. In 1605 
the Dutch opened negotiations with Golconda and established 
factories in Nizampatam and Masulipatam. They soon felt the 
need for ‘a footing in the Hindu territory further south in order to 
obtain the patterned goods demanded so largely in the spice- 
1 — > t_ cmt oermission from the Nayak 





also had prince Rama, Sriranga’s second son, smuggled out of the 
prison by a washerman. An attempt to rescue Sriranga by means 
of an underground tunnel, however, was discovered and led to 
stricter incarceration. Yachama made yet another effort to rescue 
the emperor and his family. He took advantage of Jagga Raya’s 
absence to arrange with a captain of Vellore fort, one Ite Obalesa, 
to slay the guards. On hearing that they were dead, Yachama was 
supposed to come and take possession of the fort. Unfortunately 
the news reached Jagga first, and he returned before Yachama had 
time to strike. Sriranga and his whole family were killed within four 
months of his accession, as the only certain way of preventing all 
future intrigues for their rescue and restoration. 

The massacre of the royal family sent a thrill of horror through 
the kingdom, and Jagga Raya and his partisans came to be deeply 
hated. Sympathy grew for Ramadeva, the sole survivor of the 
family. He owed his survival to the forethought of Yachama, who 
now proclaimed him emperor, and there ensued a long-drawn out 
civil war in which the whole empire took part. Yachama defeated 
Jagga Raya in battle and forced him to flee to the jungles for refuge. 
The Gobburi estates in the south-west of the Nellore district were 
captured. But, nothing daunted, Jagga became active again, and 
secured the support of Muttu Virappa Nayak of Madura and 
Krishnappa Nayak of Gingee. Yachama on his side paid a visit to 
Tanjore and secured the adherence of Raghunatha Nayaka to 
Rama’s cause. Yachama and his allies gathered their forces in the 



290 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

neighbourhood of Trichinopoly ; Yachama led his army from V ellore 
in that direction and was joined by Raghunatha’s forces on the way. 
The decisive engagement took place at Topur, a village near the 
Grand Anicut. Jagga Raya fell in the battle with many of his 
lieutenants, his army broke up and fled, and Yachama s victory 
was complete (1616). The putative son of Venkata, the cause of all 
the trouble, was captured, and Krishnappa Nayak lost all his forts 
except Gingee ; his subsequent attempt to recover them only result- 
ed in another defeat followed by captivity. The war was kept on 
by Etiraja, Jagga Raya’s younger brother, and by differences among 
the Nayaks. The death of the putative son in 1619, followed by 
remnciliation between Ramadeva and Etiraja whose daughter he 


married, put an end to the war and brought about the recognition 
of Rama in Karnataka, though the Madura Nayak went his own 
way. Etiraja now stood by his son-in-law, as did Raghunatha 
Nayak who helped to restore the imperial authority over contu- 
macious vassals. The reconciliation of Rama with Etiraja 


estranged Yachama, however, who had longed to confiscate all the 
Gobburi lands, including Pulicat and its surroundings, which be- 
longed to Etiraja himself. After much local fighting Ramadeva’s 
authority came to count for something in the remnants of the empire 
by about 1629, and the Nayak of Gingee gave up his hostile attitude 
and became a friendly vassal. Even Yachama's partisans were 
subdued and Pulicat and its environs firmly secured for Etiraja 
and the empire. Thus the struggle of a decade and a half ended in 


a tolerable measure of success for Rama. 


But the civil war had given Bijapur its opportunity. The sultan 
at last realized his ambition of capturing the western Telugu 
country. In 1619-20 he sent Abdul Wahab Khan against Kumool 
where Gopalaraja offered stout resistance in which he was aided by 
Golconda ; Abdul Wahab Khan was defeated and forced to make 
peace. But this was only a truce, for in 1624 he came back and 
attacked Kumool once more. Gopalaraja was now aided by his 


friends in the neighbourhood ; but the Bijapur forces won the battle 
that followed, and Gopalaraja abandoned the fort and fled. Rama 
was too preoccupied to intervene. His death in 1630 at an early 
age of twenty-eight set the seal on the Muslim conquest of Kumool 
which passed to Bijapur for good. 

With no son or brother, Rama had nominated his cousin, Peda 


Venkata, a grandson of the great Rama Raya, to succeed to the 



THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 291 

throne ; but Timma Raja, a paternal uncle of Rama, thought he had 
a better claim, and seized the government, compelling Venkata III 
to remain at his native place Anegondi. Gingee and Tanjore and 
Madura declared for Venkata, and Timma got no support and was 
generally looked upon as a usurper. He was nevertheless able 
to make trouble, and civil strife continued till his death in 1635. 
In the early stages he gained some successes, but prince Srnanga, 
son of Chenna Venkata, and younger brother of Venkata III, 
took the field on behalf of his uncle. With help from the Dutch at 
Pulicat, he beat Timma and compelled him to accept Venkata’s 
claim to the throne. He was, however, allowed to retain some of 
the places he had captured ; but when he again stirred up trouble, 
the Nayak of Gingee defeated and slew him in 1635. Peace was 
thus restored. Venkata went and lived in Vellore, entrusting the 
defence of Penugonda (once again threatened by the sultan of 
Bijapur) to Kondi Nayak who managed to keep it secure till the 
dissolution of the empire some fifteen years later. 

Thinking he was too friendly with the Nayak of Gingee, the rulers 
of Tanjore and Madura plotted to seize Venkata. They failed and 
war began in 1 637 but was soon ended by a patched-up peace. F or 
reasons that are not clear, Sriranga, once so loyal to his uncle, turned 
against him and actually engineered two invasions from Bijapur in 
1638 and 1641. On the first occasion the sultan’s forces invested 
Bangalore, and Venkata had to buy peace at the cost of a large 
indemnity early in 1639. Later in the year, with the help of troops 
sent by the southern Nayaks, he gained a moderate success which 
put a temporary check on Muslim inroads. The invasion of 1641 
was led by Randhula Khan who was joined by Sriranga; they 
marched upon Vellore after capturing some forts on the way, and 
pitched their camp within twelve miles of the capital. Once more 
aid from the Nayaks saved Vellore for a while. 

Watching the course of events in Karnataka, the sultan of 
Golconda sent an army from the east along the coast in April 1642 
to capture as much territory as possible from the Hindu empire 
which was now in the last stages of dissolution. Velugoti Timma, 
lord of Armagon in the extreme south of Nellore, and Damerla 
Venkata, ruler of Madras and Poonamallee, offered resistance, but 
it was not effective. Venkata III himself retired to the jungles 
near Narayanavanam in the Chittoor district where he died in a 
helpless condition on 10 October 1641. 










THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 293 

was active and Mir Jumla came and occupied parts of Nellore and 
Cuddapah. Mustafa Khan of Bijapur came back and prepared to 
attack Vellore. Then the Nayaks realized too late the danger that 
was threatening them all together. Even so Tirumal Nayak of 
Madura stood aloof. All other resources being spent, the jewels 
of the women of Vellore and the treasures of the Tirupati temple 
were used to maintain the defending forces. A slight success 
against Mustafa Khan won outside Vellore was not followed up by 
Srlranga owing to dissensions among his allies who abandoned him 
and retired inside the fortress. Another big battle followed at 
Virinchipuram (4 April 1646) in which Srlranga was again defeated 
despite aid from Mysore, Madura and Tanjore. Mustafa then 
besieged Vellore. Meanwhile Mir Jumla took all the territory in 
the east coast up to Pulicat; but the Dutch still refused to recognize 
Golconda for a while. Srlranga finally had to abandon all resistance 
and seek refuge in Tanjore. Madura and Mysore were unable to 
ward off the Muslim conquest of Karnataka which was completed 
by 1652. When Tanjore, like Gingee a little before, submitted 
to Bijapur in 1649, Srlranga repaired to Mysore where he kept his 
court with the aid of the Keladi chiefs, dreaming of the reconquest 
of Vellore until death came to him as a relief some time about 1675. 

The fall of Karnataka was not the fall of the Hindu cause, 
however, for even as Bijapur was ravaging it and driving Srlranga 
into exile, Sivaji commenced his eventful career, and Srlranga did 
not come to his end before Sivaji had been crowned Chatrapati 
(1674). Madura and Mysore continued as independent Hindu 
states well on into eighteenth century. 

Thus, nevertheless, ended the Kamataka-Vijayanagar empire 
more than three centuries after its foundation. During that long 
period it had maintained a constant struggle against its Muslim 
neighbours on the north, destroyed the sultanate of Madura, and 
kept Southern India free from the inroads of Islam. True, we 
find Hindus in the service of Muslim rulers and Muslim troops 
engaged by the Hindu emperors of Vijayanagar. Diplomatic, and 
even dynastic alliances, also occurred often enough between these 
two continuously contending parties; but they do not alter the 
basic nature of the historic role of Vijayanagar, which was to 
preserve South India as the last refuge of the traditional culture and 
institutions of the country. The great commentary on the Vedas 
composed by a syndicate of scholars with Sayana at their head, and 




apparent. 

It was customary for the emperor to have a plurality of wives 
and to maintain innumerable maids of honour to wait on them as 
well as on himself. They had well-appointed, separate appart- 
ments, and the maintenance of the harem was no small item in the 
expenditure of the palace. The royal princes were often employed 
in administrative offices suited to their capacity. A strong monarch 
like Krishnadeva Raya imposed restrictions on the movements of 
those who might have any pretensions to the throne and kept them 
under surveillance. 






THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 295 

The work of the central government was apportioned among a 
number of departments, and there was a well organized secretariat 
with its office near the palace. There were two treasuries, a smaller 
one for current remittances and withdrawals, and a larger reserve 
to which every king made it a point to add something and of which 
Paes says it ‘is kept locked and sealed in such a way that it cannot 
be seen by anyone’ and is ‘not opened except when the kings have 
great need’. 

Crown lands, annual tributes from feudatories and provincial 
governors paid at the time of the Mahanavami festival, port and 
customs dues from the commerce passing through the numerous 
ports of the empire, formed the chief sources of revenue which was 
collected both in cash and in kind. The land was carefully survey- 
ed and assessed according to its quality, the rates differing between 
wet and dry lands and in accordance with the crops and the yield. 
The proportion of produce claimed as revenue varied from the 
traditional sixth to as much as half the gross yield. The state often 
handed over to temples and learned Brahmins the privilege of 
enjoying its share of the land revenue in accordance with prescribed 
terms. Taxes on professions and houses, fees for licences of various 
kinds, transit and market dues and judicial fines were other sources 
from which the state got its money. Most of these taxes were 
farmed out to the highest bidder both in areas directly administered 
from the centre and in the provinces, and the impression produced 
is that of high and even oppressive taxation. 

The chief items of expenditure were the upkeep of the palace, 
the upkeep of the army, and charitable endowments. Krishnadeva 
Raya laid down the theory that income should be divided into four 
equal parts: one quarter went to maintain the palace establishment 
and to charity, two went to the army, and the remaining quarter was 
deposited in the Reserve Treasury. Doubtless this was only the 
ideal, and practice depended entirely on current exigencies. 

Vijayanagar was perhaps the nearest approach to a war-state 
ever made by a Hindu kingdom; and its political organization was 
dominated by its military needs. The emperor maintained a large 
standing army consisting of an elephant corps, cavalry and infantry ; 
in this force, ‘the soldiers receive their pay’, noted Abdur Razzak, 
‘every four months, and no payment is ever made by a draft upon 
the revenues of any province’. In addition, military fiefs studded 
the whole length and breadth of the empire, each under a nayak 




296 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

or military leader authorized to collect revenue and to administer 
a specified area provided he maintained an agreed number of 
elephants, horses, and troops ever ready to join the imperial forces 
in war. Nuniz counted more than two hundred such nayaks. There 
were regular military schools where men were trained in archery, 
swordsmanship, and so on, and prepared for enlistment in the 
army; the artillery, however, seems generally to have been manned 
by foreigners. A military camp was a moving city, ‘arranged in 
streets with many open spaces’. The number of non-combatant 
camp-followers was too large not to impede the troops, but this was 
a common feature of the times. Fortresses played a large part in 
the defence organization, and the arts of siege were well known and 
extensively practised. There must have been a navy of some sort 
for the Rayas had the command of several ports and of parts of 
Ceylon; but we have no definite information on its strength or 
organization. 

The details of the organization of provincial government de- 
pended on the historical antecedents of each locality. In the 
extreme south and on the west coast, the older rulers of the land 
were allowed to carry on in a subordinate capacity paying tribute 
and submitting to the general supervision of a high official of the 
empire, usually a prince of the blood-royal ; such were the Pandyas, 
the Tiruvadis, and the chiefs of Gersoppa, Karkal and other places. 
In the Tamil districts the ancient Chola territorial divisions, 
together with the deeply-rooted system of autonomous village as- 
semblies, were allowed to continue and no attempt was made to im- 
pose arrangements perfected by the Rayas elsewhere in the Telugu 
and Kannada areas. The autonomy of villages, however, suffered 
considerable abridgement in this period as their officials came 
to be linked up more and more closely with the central government 
and its representatives. The names of divisions and offices differed 
with the locality ; but everywhere the provincial governor appointed 
from the centre was more the military commander of a strategic 
fort than an ordinary civil servant of the crown. The boundaries 
of provinces, or rajyas, were changed from time to time to suit 
immediate administrative needs; and some territories, especially 
in the northern sections of the empire which constantly passed to 
and fro between Vijayanagar and its Muslim enemies, must have 
experienced many changes in their rule. These governors and 
nayaks were allowed to rule their fiefs by deputy and therefore 





In towns the streets were patrolled regularly at nights, and the police 
arrangements of the capital were particularly efficient and received 
the commendation of foreign observers like Abdur Razzak. 

Justice was administered by a hierarchy of courts, the emperor’s 
sabha being the highest appellate authority. Some of these courts 
appear to have been peripatetic, being held wherever the officers 
concerned were encamped. The smriti of Yajnavalkya and Mad- 
hava’s great commentary on Parasara’s code commanded special 
authority in the decision of doubtful legal points. Minor offences 
and violation of caste and trade rules were dealt with in the first 
instance by village courts and caste and guild organizations, and 
perhaps seldom found their way to the courts of the crown. When 
human evidence failed trial by ordeal was not unknown. By 
modern standards punishments were harsh and even barbarous. 



HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

T. V. Mahalingam: Administration and Social life under Vijayanagar 
(Madras., 1940) 

K. A. N. Sastri and N. Venkataramanayya : Further Sources of Vijayanagar 
History (Madras, 1947) 

R. Sewell : A Forgotten Empire (London, 1924) 

N. Venkataramanayya: Studies in the History of the Third Dynasty of 
Vijayanagar (Madras, 1935) 


I. SANGAMA DYNASTY 
Sangama 


Harihara I Kampa I Bukka I Marapa Muddappa 
(1336-1357) (1344-77) 

Kampa II Viru- Harihara II 
panna (1377-1404) 


Virupaksha I Bukka II Devaraya I 
(1404-5) (1405-6) (1406-22) 


Ramachandraraya Vijaya Raya I 
(1422) (1422-26)? 

Praudha Devaraya Pratapa Devaraya 

or Devaraya II 

(1422-46) 

I I I 

? Vijayaraya II Mallikarjuna Virupaksha II 
(1446-7) (1447-65) (1465-85) 


Raja&khara 

(1406) 


Praudharaya 

(1485) 



THE EMPIRE OF VIJAYANAGAR 


299 


II. SALUVA DYNASTY 

G T' a 


Saluva Narasimha (1486-91) Timma 


I 1 

Tirumala Dammaraya 

or Timma or Immadi Narasimha 

(1491) (1491-1505) 


III. TULUVA DYNASTY 
Isvara Nayaka 

Narasa Nayaka 
(1491-1503) 


Vila Narasimha Krishnadeva Raya Achyutadeva Raya Ranga 
(1505-9) (1509-29) (1530-42) 

■ j Venkata I 1 SadaJiva 

Tirumaladevi Tirumala (1542) (1542-76) 

m. Aliya Rama Raja 



A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


AR AVlDU DYNASTY 
AravRi Bukka 


(Aliya) Rama Raja Tirumala (1) 

(m. Tirumaladevi (1570-1) 

d. of Krishnadeva Raya I 

(1542-64) I 

Sriranga I (2) Ram: 
J (1572-85) j_ 

Peda Tirumala Sriranga Tirumala_ 


enkatadr: 


’eda Venkata ( 
r Venkata III 
(1630-42) 


) Chenna Ram 

Venkata (] 

Sriranga III (7) (adopted 
by Gopalaraja of Kanda- 
navolu) (1642-9) 

Lived till 1675 


losed within brackets by the side of n 




There is no means of forming a reliable estimate of the popu- 
lation at any time during this long period we are now reviewing ; 
even the Cholas, although they kept a minute record of property 
in land, never thought of taking a census of the population. In 
the ports on the seaboard, and in the capitals of kingdoms, parti- 
cularly in Vijayanagar, there were undoubtedly considerable 
numbers of foreigners, including Arabs, Jews, Persians, Chinese, 
people from Malaya and the eastern archipelago; and, later, the 
Portuguese and other European nations. The presence of Parsis 
is noticed by Friar Jordanus at the beginning of the fourteenth 
century. Necessarily and obviously, however, the bulk of the popu- 
lation was always and everywhere Hindus organized in castes. 




302 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

There was some connexion between caste and occupation, but 
this was by no means unalterable, and the pressure of new factors 
and situations was always bringing about changes, in spite of 
protests from conservatives and even occasional attempts on the 
part of the political power to stop them. 

Then, as now, the service of the state in its civil departments, 
as well as the army and the navy (where one was maintained), 
furnished openings for all classes of the population; and many are 
the instances of Brahmin generals who distinguished themselves 
in war. Krishnadeva Raya had a high opinion of their loyalty 
and considered that they should be put in charge of important 
forts in all strategic places. Forest and hill tribes furnished a 
favourite recruiting-ground for the army, especially in time of 
war. The roads were often infested by robbers, and any sharp 
local quarrel or the turbulence of a chieftain might lead to a village 
being attacked or its cattle being taken away; in such circumstances 
the people generally had to defend themselves, and numerous 
inscriptions attest the bravery of many village heroes, especially 
near forests and mountains. 

Conquests sometimes led to the large-scale migration of people 
from one part of the country to another, and led to new adjust- 
ments in economic and social relations. The most recent instance 
of this, and one whose effects are still clearly traceable, was the 
coming into the Tamil country of numbers of Telugus and Kan- 
nadigas with the extension of the empire of Vijayanagar and, 
perhaps, of the Hoysala power earlier. They must have come in 
as officers and soldiers upholding the authority of the rulers and 
their migration was doubtless encouraged by grants of land and 
other concessions at the expense of the people of the conquered 
territory. Royal patronage of learning, the arts, and religion 
were other causes of similar movements. 

The king and his court led an extravagant and luxurious life 
in striking contrast to the modest living standard of the rest of 
the population. The pomp and ceremony of the court became 
more and more dazzling in the course of centuries and may be 
said to have reached its culmination underthe Rayas of Vijayanagar. 
The palace always had a large establishment attached to it; in 
theory there were seventy-two departments ( niyogas ) in a palace 
as in a temple. On the establishment there were large numbers 
of women, specially chosen for their youth and beauty. Some 




(1520-2) and other foreign writers often described the number 
and costly establishments of the Vijayanagar queens as well as the 
large numbers of women attendants, the lavishness of their clothing 
and jewellery, and the sundry light duties allotted to them in the 
daily routine of the palace. We learn, for instance, that in the 
provincial court of Raghunatha Nayak of Tanjore there were many 
learned women poets who were capable of expounding works 
written in various languages. The role of women in high society 
was varied, important, and, generally speaking, pleasant. Salt 
was not unknown, especially among the upper classes, but by no 

The king made his appearance in open durbar at least once a 
day, when all high officials and nobles had to be in attendance, 
and nothing was omitted that could increase the splendour of the 
display. It was then that he generally transacted public business, 
heard complaints, received ambassadors from foreign countries 
and tribute from subordinate rulers. Such scenes have been 
repeatedly described by travellers from abroad, and the following 
account by Nicolas Pimenta (1599) of the interview he had with 










forces. Although instances of clemency, such as Narasimhavar- 
man I’s sparing Badami, and Vikramaditya II the citizens of 
Kanchi, are indeed known, the wars between the Cholas and the 
Chalukyas of Kalyani, and those between Bahmani and Vijaya- 
nagar, were undoubtedly marked by much wanton destruction and 
cruelty. Nuniz describes an expeditionary force of the Vijaya- 
nagar army in the following terms : ‘ All were equally well armed, 
each after his own fashion, the archers and musqueteers with their 
quilted tunics, and the shieldmen with their swords and poignards 
in their girdles; the shields are so large that there is no need 
for armour to protect the body, which is completely covered; 
the horses in full clothing, and the men with doublets, and 







HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 
3 where the troops were systematically trained in 
; in peacetime. Commanders who were defeated 
:n’s clothes to wear, as Yuan Chwang observed, 
:onfirmed by Chola inscriptions of the eleventh 


century. 

Not much information is forthcoming about the navy, though 
we hear of naval operations, great and small. The conquest of Re- 
vatidvlpa and Puri on the West Coast, by the Chalukyas of Bada- 
mi, and that of Ceylon and the Maldives by the Pallavas, Pandyas 
and Cholas as well as by Vijayanagar, above all the great naval 
expedition of Rajendra Chola against the maritime empire of 
Sri Vijaya could not have been executed without an efficient naval 
organization. Furthermore the maritime trade of the country, 
which was always considerable, must have required protection 
from the depredations of pirates and hostile powers. The 
opinions of Chola mariners expressed in treatises on navigation 
were quoted with approval by their Arab successors in the fifteenth 
and sixteenth centuries. There is no doubt that the kingdoms of 
South India had a fairly continuous maritime tradition which 
served their immediate purposes ; but it failed them altogether 
against the more adventurous nations of Europe. 

In civil life the Brahmins occupied a highly respected position. 
With the exception of the few who entered the state service in the 
army and elsewhere, they generally devoted themselves to religious 
and literary pursuits and stood outside the race for wealth and 
power. They lived on voluntary gifts from all classes of people 
from the king downwards. Hundreds of inscriptions proclaim 
the continued solicitude of kings, nobles and merchants for the 
maintenance and encouragement of a class of men who devoted 
themselves exclusively to learning andteachiog, who were capable 
of detached thinking on all problems of social welfare, and whose 
presence in every town and village was calculated to provide not 
only patterns of ethical and religious conduct for the rest of die 
population, but active helpers and disinterested arbitrators in 
the numerous concerns of their daily life. ‘ The intellectual supe- 
riority of the Brahmans as a caste’, says Sir Charles Eliot, ‘was 
sufficiently real to ensure its acceptance and in politics they had the 
good sense to rule by serving, to be ministers and not kings. 
In theory and to a considerable extent in practice, the Brahmans 
and their gods are not an imperium tit imperio but an imperitmt 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 307 
super imperium.' It cannot be denied that the Brahmin did not 
always live up to the ideals of his vocation, and that some move- 
ments, like that of the Lingayats, raised a protest against the 
position accorded to the Brahmin in society; but as a rule he 
proved true to his trust, and the rest of the community willingly 
acknowledged the justice of it in every way. 

In fact the institution of caste with all its social and economic 
implications was accepted almost universally, and the upholding 
of the social order organized on its basis was held to be the primary 
duty of the ruler. This accounts at once for the prevalence of 
much social exclusiveness in matters of food and marriage among 
different sections of the people, and for the readiness with which 
they came together and co-operated on matters of common con- 
cern like the management of a temple and its adjuncts, the regula- 
tion of land and irrigation rights in the village, and the adminis- 
tration of local affairs generally. The emphasis was throughout 
on the performance of duties attaching to one’s station ratherthan 
on the rights of the individual or group. The general atmosphere 
was one of social harmony and contentment with the existing 
order ; differences and disputes there were — there has been no 
society without them — but they were seldom acrimonious. Even 
the quarrels between ‘right-hand’ and ‘left-hand’ castes, a dis- 
tinction which has an early start and whose origin is a mystery, 
did not attain the violence that characterized them in subsequent 
times. Both in towns and villages, the castes tended to live in 
separate quarters of their own and follow their own peculiar 
customs and habits. The outcastes who tilled the land and did 
menial work (under conditions little different from slavery) 
lived in hamlets at a distance from the village proper. 

Some curious instances of mixed castes and their trades occur 
in the inscriptions. Towards the close of the reign of Kulottunga 
I, for instance, the bhaftas of a village consulted the codes and laid 
down the professions to be followed by the anuloma caste of Ratha- 
karas as architecture, coach and chariot-building, the erection of 
gopuras with icons on them, the manufacture of sacrificial 
instruments and so on — a decision in conformity with the nearly 
contemporary manual of law, the Mitakshara of Vignanesvara. 
Sometimes the privileges of particular castes became, for specific 
reasons, the subject of royal regulation. For instance, the stone- 
masons ( kanmalar ) of South Kongu and some other areas were 




308 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

granted the following privileges by a Chola monarch: the blowing 
of two conches, the beating of drums and so on at domestic 
occurrences, good or bad, the use of sandals when they went out 
of their homes; and the plastering of the walls of their residences 
with lime plaster. A barber Kondoja pleased SadaSiva and Rama 
Raya so much that he was able to secure exemption for his entire 
community from taxes and dues like forced labour, land-rent, 
Mahanavami torches and so on; and a number of inscriptions 
recording this fact contain engravings of razors, strops, mirrors, 
scissors and others of the barbers’ tools of trade. 

Food and dress varied with the time, place and the class of 
people concerned. Much authentic and detailed information 
on these subjects can be gathered from epigraphs, literature and 
the observations of foreign travellers which become more copious 
and detailed after the foundation of Vijayanagar. Here, for in- 
stance, is Varthema’s account of what he saw in Vijayanagar early 
in the sixteenth century: ‘Their dress is this: the men of condition 
wear a short shirt and on their head a cloth of gold and silk in the 
Moorish fashion, but nothing on the feet. The common people 
go quite naked, with the exception of a piece of cloth about their 
middle. The king wears a cap of gold brocade two spans long, 
and when he goes to war he wears a quilted dress of cotton, and 
over it he puts another garment full of golden piastres, and having 
all around it jewels of various kinds. His horse is worth more 
than some of our cities, on account of the ornaments which 
it wears. When he rides for his pleasure he is always accompanied 
by three or four kings, and many other lords, and five or six 
thousand horse. Wherefore he may be considered to be a very 
powerful lord.’ 

Some sections of the population — Brahmins, Jainas, and Saivas 
— were strict vegetarians. There was generally a good supply 
of the prime necessaries of life, and scarcity and famine are 
only rarely heard of. 

Of the system of education, the only positive information that 
has come down to us is concerned with higher studies in Sanskrit 
which formed the subject of liberal endowments recorded in 
inscriptions of considerable length. What we should now call 
technical or vocational training was a private affair; the father 
brought up his children in his calling, and learning went side by 
side with doing. The erection of a temple or palace must have 



ch, besides hospitals, formed the main channels for the pro- 
ation of their gospel. They had schools at Madura, San Thome 
Chandragiri. 

‘Adult education’ was provided throughout the country by 
owments in temples for the recitation and exposition of the 
:s and Puranas. An intelligent and popular expositor seldom 
fined himself to the words of his text, but at once instructed 
and amused his audience by ranging over a variety of topics in- 
cluding shrewd comments on current affairs. This form of 
popular instruction is not unknown even at the present day. 





310 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

The singing of devotional hymns in temples by choirs regularly 
maintained for that purpose and the training of young men for 
the same purpose in schools generally attached to mathas is another 
side of education that deserves notice. Besides mathas , Jain 
pallis and Buddhist viharas played a part in educating the people 
wherever they existed, and they had large libraries of books in all 
branches of learning which were being copied from time to time. 

Sanskrit learning tended to be the monopoly of Brahmins, 
though there were exceptions, and it was particularly encouraged 
by means of large special endowments. Sometimes only four, 
and sometimes as many as fourteen or eighteen subjects of study 
were enumerated. The four subjects were: philosophy ( anvik - 
shiki), Veda ( trayi ), economics ( lartta ), and politics ( dandaniti ) — 
a group which was particularly suited to kings and which in fact 
first occurs in Kautilya’s Arthaiastra. The fourteen vidyas 
were : the four Vedas; six angas (auxiliaries) — phonetics, prosody, 
grammar, etymology (of difficult words), astronomy and ritual; 
Parana; logic ( Tarka ); exegesis ( Mimamsa ); and law ( Dharma - 
iastra). To these were added Ayurveda (medicine), Dhanurveda 
(archery), Gandharvaveda (Music) and Arthaiastra (politics) to 
make up the tale of eighteen. Brahmins learned in many of these 
sciences served as Rajagurus (teachers of kings) and spread them- 
selves all over the land edifying the lives of the inhabitants of 
every town and village. Gifts of land and houses were frequently 
offered as inducements to Brahmins to come and settle where 
they were wanted. In several places they were organized into 
corporate Colleges called brahmapuris and ghatikas, like the 
brahmapuri at Belgaum or the ghatika at Kanchi. A Vaishnava 
matha and its scholars are mentioned in an inscription of Nripa- 
tunga’s reign from Kaveripakkam. Another record of the same 
monarch proves the flourishing condition of a college at Bahur, 
near Pondicherry, where the fourteen vidyas were pursued. At 
Salatgi was another eminent college to which pupils came from 
different Janapadas (countries) and whose vidyarthisangha was 
richly endowed in 945 by Narayana, the minister of Krishna III, 
with the revenues of houses, land, and levies on marriages and 
other ceremonies. We also hear (1058) of a ghatika at Nagai with 
ample provision for 200 Veda students, 50 students of the iastras, 
three teachers of the Vedas, and three teachers of the iastras — 
one each for Bhatta, Prabhakara-mlmamsa and Nyaya — -besides 





tne i aaavas or ucv agin, liuutduuu 6 . 

receive generous support from the Rayas of Vijayanagar and their 
numerous feudatories. The Bahmani kingdom and its successors 
naturally devoted more attention to Muslim education and Islamic 
studies, in such large and well-equipped colleges as the one at 
Bidar, established by the celebrated minister Mahmud Gawan. 

The temple was not merely a place of worship; it filled a large 
place in the cultural and economic life of the people. Its construc- 
tion and maintenance offered employment to numbers of architects 
and craftsman who vied with one another in bold planning and 
skilful execution. The making of icons in stone and metal gave 
scope to the talents of the best sculptors of the country; some of 
the larger bronzes cast in the Chola period take their place among 
the wonders of the world for the mass of metal manipulated as 
well as for the grace of form attained in the result. The daily 
routine, especially of the larger temples, gave constant employment 
to numbers of priests, choristers, musicians, dancing-girls, 
florists, cooks and many other classes of servants. The periodical 
festivals were occasions marked by fairs, contests of learning, 
wrestling-matches and every other form of popular entertainment. 
Schools and hospitals were often located in the temple precincts, 
and it also served often as the town hall where people assembled 
to consider local affairs or to hear the exposition of sacred literature. 


312 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

The large endowments in land and cash bestowed on each temple 
by successive generations of pious donors tended to make it 
at once a generous landlord and a banker whose aid was always 
available to those that needed it. The practice of decorating 
images, particularly those used during processions, with numerous 
jewels set with precious stones encouraged the jeweller’s art to a 
considerable extent. There can be no better record of the details 
of the economy of a large temple than is provided by the numerous 
inscriptions of the Great Temple of Tanjore. There the gifts 
of Rajaraja came largely from booty captured in successful warfare 
and included well over 41,500 kalanjus of gold, or, taking a kalanju 
to be about 70 grains, well over 500 lbs. troy weight. The value 
of jewels was 10,200 kasus, equal to half as many kalanjus in gold. 
Of silver he gave 50,650 kalanjus or over 600 lbs. troy weight. He 
set apart lands in villages throughout his dominions, including 
Ceylon, with an annual income of 116,000 kalams of paddy, equal 
at the then prevailing prices to 58,000 kasus, besides a cash income 
of l,ioo kasus. For the service of the temple, 400 devadasis were 
impressed from those attached to other temples in the empire, 
each one receiving a pangu (share) consisting of a house and one 
veil of land yielding a net revenue of 100 kalams of paddy a year. 
About 180 further such shares were set apart to maintain 212 
male dancing-masters, musicians, drummers, tailors, goldsmiths, 
accountants, and so on. These men-servants included three 
people to sing the Ariyam and four others the Tamil, which 
apparently are the two systems of music called ahamargam and 
deli elsewhere. A choir of 50, on a daily wage of theee kurunis 
of paddy, recited the Tiruppadiyam to the accompaniment of 
musical instruments. This choir had the additional privilege of 
filling vacancies by co-option if any of their number died or emi- 
grated without leaving behind a suitable relative to take his place. 
Rajaraja’s elder sister Kundavai was another generous contributor 
to temple funds. On one occasion she presented gold weighing 
nearly 10,000 kalanjus and utensils valued at 18,000 kasus. 
Others, too — queens, high officials and regiments of soldiers — 
made gifts which have been recorded with equal care and precision 
on the walls and pillars of the temple. Cash endowments, which 
amounted to several thousands of kalus, were loaned to numerous 
village assemblies at rates of interest fixed in kind or money, 
and generally about 12 per cent per annum. Camphor, 



SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 313 
cardamom-seeds, champak-buds and khus-khus roots were mong 
the products provided for by means of cash endowments. 

The inscriptions contain accurate and detailed descriptions of 
numerous icons, some of which were cast in the form of complex 
groups of figures illustrating favourite themes from legends. 
They also contain an equally minute and complete account of the 
ornaments and jewels of the temple, and record periodical inquests 
into the management of temple affairs by officers of state, and some- 
times even by the king himself — clear proof that the business 
side of the temple administration was properly controlled. All 
systems of public administration were not as efficient as the Chola 
system, and all temples were not so well off as that of Tanjore. 
As a matter of course, however, every temple held more or less 
the same position in relation to its neighbourhood that the Great 
Temple held in the Chola capital; the difference was only one of 
degree. And it is no exaggeration to say that the temple gathered 
round itself all that was best in the arts of civilized existence and 
regulated them with the humaneness bom of the spirit of dharma. 
As an agency of social well-being the medieval Indian temple 
has few parallels. 

Of the sports and pastimes of the different classes of people, 
the inscriptions do not give us many authentic accounts of a detail- 
ed nature. The Rashtrakuta Govinda III took part in a boar- 
hunt on the banks of the Tungabhadra when he was camping 
there after his conquest of Kanchi in 804, and the Ganga Butuga 
II’s hound 'Kali' died after fighting a boar. (A memorial was 
erected over its remains at Atakur and a gorava appointed to offer 
regular worship to it.) A ball game on horseback, much like polo, 
is said to have been the favourite game of the Rashtrakuta prince 
Indra IV. Paes states that, every morning before daylight, 
Krishnadeva Raya drank gingelly-oil and exercised himself with 
earthenware weights and a sword till he had sweated out all the 
oil. He then wrestled with one of his wrestlers and after that 
went ridingbefore his morning bath. There were arenas inside the 
royal palace in Vijayanagar where, for the amusement of the monarch 
and his court, fights between animals and wrestling matches 
took place, the latter sometimes among women. Gambling, racing, 
cock and ram fights were the pastimes of common people, 
besides the festivals and fairs of which there was no lack. Then 
there were peripatetic entertainers like the snake-charmer and 



314 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

troupes of acrobatic performers whose visits furnished much 
genuine amusement at very little cost. Picnics and folk-dances 
offered other means of diversion. The following account of 
what Pietro Della Valle saw in the streets of Ikkeri of an evening 
(in 1623-4) is of great interest from several points of view: 

‘We saw going along the streets several companies of young 
girls, well clothed, after their manner, with some of the above- 
mentioned wrought and figured silk from the girdle downwards; 
and from thence upwards either naked, or else very pure linen, 
either of one colour, or striped and wrought with several, besides 
a scarf of the same work cast over the shoulder. Their heads 
were decked with yellow and white flowers formed into a high and 
large Diadem, with some sticking out like sun-beams, and others 
twisted together and hanging down in several fashions which made 
a pretty sight. All of them cariy’d in each hand a little round 
painted stick, about a span long, or a little more which they struck 
together after a musical measure, to the sound of Drums and other 
instruments, and one of the skilfullest of the company sang one 
verse of a song, at the end of which they all reply’d seven or eight 
times in the number of their meter with the word Coli , Cole, Coli, 
which signifies I know not what, but, I believe, ’tis a word of joy . . . 
I imagined it was for some extraordinary Festival.’ 

Another citation, from the same observer, relating to Calicut, 
is well worth making for its vivid portraiture of conditions many 
of which were obviously not confined to that city: ‘We went to 
see the Bazar which is near the shore ; the Houses or rather Cottages 
are built of Earth and thatched with Palm-leaves, being very low; 
the streets also are very narrow, but sufficiently long; the Market 
was full of all sorts of Provisions and other things necessary to 
the livelihood of that people, conformably to their custom; for, 
as for clothing they need little, both men and women going quite 
naked, saving that they have a piece either of Cotton, or silk, 
hanging down from the girdle to the knees and covering their 
shame; the better sort are either wont to wear it all blew, or white 
stripped with Azure, or Azure and some other colour; a dark blew 
being most esteemed amongst them. Moreover both Men and 
Women wear their hair long and ty’d about their head; the women 
with a lock hanging on one side under the ear becomingly enough 
as almost all Indian women do; the dressing of whose head is, 
in my opinion, the gallantest that I have seen in any other nation. 





temples and other corporate institutions, the terms of the tenancy 
being fixed either by the terms of the original endowment or by 
separate negotiation in each case. Very often such tenants had 
rights which made them more or less part-owners of the land they 
cultivated. The distinction between garden land, including flower- 
gardens and orchards, in the neighbourhood of capital cities, land 
under wet cultivation and that under dry cultivation, and forest land 
was carefully maintained for taxation and other purposes, wet lands 
being further divided into several grades according to their natural 
fertility. Besides cultivating food grains and pulses on both wet and 
dry land, intensive flower and vegetable growing and the raising 



316 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

of commercial crops like cotton and sugar cane were also widely 
practised. Black land and red land are particularly mentioned 
in Chalukya records besides the usual wet land, garden land and 
waste land. Betel and arecanuts, ginger and turmeric, fresh 
fruits and flowers, were the chief items of garden produce. 
Abdur Razzak noticed the number of rose merchants in Vijaya- 
nagar and added that roses seemed as necessary as food to the 
people of that city. The importance of irrigation was well 
understood from early times; dams were erected across streams and 
channels taken off from them wherever possible. Large tanks 
were made to serve areas where there were no natural streams, 
and the proper maintenance of these tanks was regularly provided 
for. The extension of agriculture was encouraged at all times 
by granting special facilities and tax concessions for specified 
periods to people who reclaimed land and brought it under 
cultivation for the first time. The prosperity of the cultivator 
depended to some extent on the seasons, but to a larger measure 
on the conditions of his tenure and on the tax-collecting agency. 
Tenant conditions were probably easier on lands set apart for 
religious and charitable uses and of which temples, mathas and 
Brahmins were the landlords. But where rights were assigned 
to high officials and nobles, or where, as often happened, the 
collection of the land tax was farmed, both the rate of tax and the 
manner of collecting it might have pressed hard on the cultivator. 
Even in the heyday of liberal and efficient administration — under 
the imperial Cholas — there were complaints of the tax-gatherers’ 
oppressive methods; and after the weakening of Vijayanagar, 
under the Nayaks, the ryots were generally compelled to purchase 
the state’s share of the grain at prices arbitrarily fixed by the tax- 
gatherer. Closely allied to agriculture was cattle-raising and 
dairy farming, and land was set apart for pasture; this industry 
must have been widespread at all times, but in the inscriptions 
we hear more of the cattle belonging to temples and eating- 
houses, of the cowherds in charge of them, and of the obligations 
they owed to the temple or other owner. Ghee was not only an 
important item of food among the upper classes, but was used in 
considerable quantities for burning in lamps in the larger temples. 

In most of the common industries the rule was production for 
the local market; but the movements of individual merchants 
from one part of the country to another, and the highly developed 



SOCIAL ^AND ECONOMIC ^ONDITIONS 317 

organization of mercantile corporations in different parts of it, 
provide adequate evidence of a brisk internal trade in certain 
sorts of goods. Spinning and weaving formed a major industry 
which occupied considerable numbers, and guilds of weavers 
were generally in a flourishing condition and took an active part 
in many local concerns. The export of the finer varieties of 
cloth from various parts of the country is proved by records 
during the entire period covered by this survey. Warangal 
specialized in the manufacture of carpets which were much sought 
after, and other places had other specialities. The metal indus- 
tries and the jeweller’s art had reached a high state of perfection. 
Household utensils of metal were apparently confined to the rich, 
earthenware being in more common use to judge from the frequ- 
ency with which they are mentioned in connexion with cooking 
and eating in salas (or charitable feeding-halls). Iron was used 
for making arms, and some places like Palnad attained celebrity 
for the excellence of their output. The manufacture and sale 
of salt was generally the concern of government which derived a 
considerable revenue from it. This industry was naturally con- 
centrated at important centres on the sea-coast, as was pearl- 
fishing in the Gulf of Mannar — an important industry which 
attracted the notice of foreign visitors (including Marco Polo) 
who have often described it. 

Almost all the arts and crafts were organized in castes and guilds 
of their own, and work was clearly done on a corporate basis, for 
we hear little about individual artists, not even the names of the 
architects, sculptors and painters who added so much beauty to life 
in the country. One of the very few and notable exceptions to 
this rule is Sri Gundan Anivaritachari, the builder of the LokeSvara 
temple (now called Virupaksha) at Pattadakal, who procured many 
privileges for his class from the contemporary Chalukya ruler of 
Badami besides winning for himself the title Tenkanadiseyasutra- 
dhari, ‘the architect of the South’. It was he who designed the 
sculptures of scenes from the Ramayana which adorn the walls 
of this temple. Sri Gundan is said to have been an expert in 
planning cities, constructing palaces, vehicles, thrones and bed- 
steads. Several Hoysala sculptors ‘signed’ their creations, the 
most famous names among them being Malitamma, Baicoja, 
Caudaya, Nanjaya, and Bama. 

It is not possible to give a detailed account of the conditions 






318 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

of internal transport. There was as little scope then (as 
now) for the use of natural waterways for the carriage of 
merchandise in the interior, and there is no evidence that 
canals were made for any purpose other than irrigating agri- 
cultural lands. Roads are mentioned in inscriptions from all 
parts of the country,, and to maintain them, great and small, in 
good repair was part of the duty of local authorities, the villagers 
being generally expected to give their labour free. The breadth 
of a main road was about twenty-four feet; but there were also 
tracks, only slightly better than foot-paths, which were apparently 
impassable for wheeled traffic. There was regular coastal shipping. 
Up-country, merchandise was carried in carts, on the heads or 
shoulders of men (kavadis), and on the backs of animals. The 
roads were not always safe and brigandage increased in unsettled 
times. Soon after the battle of Rakshasi-Tangdi, Caesar Frederick 
was detained in Vijayanagar for seven months ‘until the ways 
were clear of thieves, which at that time ranged up and down’. 

Merchants were generally organized in powerful guilds and 
corporations which often transcended political divisions and were 
therefore not much affected by the wars and revolutions going on 
about them. The most celebrated guilds from fairly early times 
were the Manigramam and the Nanadesis or AinnUrruvar. 
The records of the Kakatlyas speak of merchants of the home coun- 
try ( svadesabeharulu ), merchants of another country {paradeia- 
beharulu), and merchants from different countries ( nanadetis ). 
The first were the local merchants organized in local guilds — 
nagarams. The second were like the first except that they came 
from another country — perhaps combining pleasure with business 
while on a visit to their neighbours, or possibly acquiring religi- 
ous merit by attending yatras and festivals in famous shrines. 
The last were the powerful guilds already mentioned which in- 
cluded merchants from all countries, with established branches 
in all of them, and perhaps playing a prominent part in the foreign 
trade of the country as a whole. The name Manigramam is 
generally explained as a corruption of Vanik-gramam, ‘an associa- 
tion of merchants’, and this may well be correct. They are men- 
tioned in many early South Indian inscriptions and in a Tamil 
inscription at Takua-pa (Siam) of the reign of Nandivarman III 
Pallava. The fact that this merchant guild had established itself 
on the opposite coast of the Bay of Bengal with sufficient 




SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 319 
permanence for it to be put in charge of a Vishnu temple and a 
tank gives a clue to a yet little-known chapter in the annals of our 
ancient politics and commerce. 

The Ainnurruvar, often styled the Five Hundred Svamis of 
Ayyavolepura (Aihole), were the most celebrated of the medieval 
South Indian merchant guilds. Like the great kings of the age, 
they had a prasasti of their own which recounted their traditions 
and achievements. They were the protectors of the Vira- 
Bananju-dharma, i.e., the law of the noble merchants, Banaiiju 
being obviously derived from Sanskrit Vanija , merchant. This 
dharma was embodied in 500 vira-sasanas, edicts of heroes. They 
had the picture of a bull on their flag and were noted ‘throughout 
the world’ for their daring and enterprise. They claimed descent 
from the lines of Vasudeva, Khandali and Mulabhadra, and were 
followers of the creeds of Vishnu, Mahesvara and Jina. Among 
the countries they visited were Chera, Chola, Pandya, Maleya, 
Magadha, Kausala, Saurashtra, Dhanushtra, Kurumba, Kam- 
bhoja, Gaulla, Lata, Barwara, Parasa (Persia), and Nepala. They 
traversed land-routes and water-routes penetrating all the coun- 
tries of the six continents. They traded in elephants, blood 
stock, sapphires, moonstones, pearls, rubies, diamonds, lapis 
lazuli, onyx, topaz, carbuncles, emeralds and other precious 
articles; cardamoms, cloves, bdellium, sandal, camphor, musk, 
saffron, malegaja and other spices and perfumes. They either 
sold them wholesale or hawked them about on their shoulders; 
they paid the sunka regularly and filled the royal treasury with gold 
and jewels, and replenished the kings’ armoury; they bestowed 
gifts on pandits and sages ‘versed in the four samayas and six 
darianas'. There were among them the sixteen sett is of the eight 
nads, who used asses and buffaloes as carriers, and many classes 
of merchants and soldiers, viz., g aver as, gatrigas, settis, settiguttas , 
ankakaras , blras, bfravanijas, gandigas, gavundas and gavundasva- 
mis. A fragmentary Tamil inscription from Sumatra (ro88) and 
a temple of Vishnu which they erected at Pagan and which was still 
flourishing in the thirteenth century attest the truth of their claim 
to trade with foreign countries beyond the seas. In the Chola 
country they had their own settlements called vira-pattanas 
where with the sanction of the local powers and the central govern- 
ment, they enjoyed special privileges in matters of trade. Histo- 
rians have generally tended to ignore the effect of trade on the 





320 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA # 

outlook of the people of those comparatively remote times. 
There is no doubt, for instance, that the continuous meeting and 
intermingling of people of diverse social backgrounds tended to 
create a liberal and cosmopolitan, as opposed to an insular, attitude 
to life. . 

The maritime trade of South India in the early centuries of 
the Christian era has been briefly described in Chapter VII. In 
the Chinese annals of the fifth, sixth and seventh centuries, all 
the products of Ceylon and India are classed, with those of Arabia 


and Africa, as pro 
India and China, 
use by the fifth < 
merchantman whi 



and Ceylonese merchants; and I-tsing mentions the names of 
thiitv-seven of his contemporaries who took this route to India 


at different times. There were Brahmin temples and merchants 


in Canton in a.d. 750. 

By the ninth century a.d. the countries of southern Asia had 
developed an extensive maritime commerce which brought great 
prosperity. The T’ang empire in China, Sri Vijaya under the 
powerful line of the Sailendras, and the Abbasid Khalifat at 
Baghdad were the chief states outside India that flourished on this 
trade. Owing to political troubles China became unsafe for 
foreigners in the latter part of the ninth century, but Chinese ships 
regularly called at the ports of the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra 
to buy foreign goods. This was the beginning of Chinese navi- 
gation. From the twelfth to the fifteenth century, Chinese sea- 
going junks were frequent visitors to the west coast of India. 
Siraf, on the eastern coast of the Persian Gulf, was the chief 
emporium in the west and the rich merchants of that city feasted 
the numerous merchants from China, Java, Malaya, and India 
who visited their city— every Indian insisting on having a separate 
plate exclusively reserved for him I 

At the end of the tenth century, the political situation in China 
became normal again, and the Sung government of the day 
showed great interest in foreign trade. It became a government 
monopoly and strenuous efforts were made to increase it. Eager 
to take advantage of the new conditions, the Cholas sent ‘em- 
bassies’ to China. One such trade delegation left towards the 
end of Rajaraja’s reign and reached China in 1015 after spending 




becomes more copious and precise after the foundation of Vijaya- 
nagar and BahmanI kingdoms, thanks to the many interested for- 
eigners who visited these famous kingdoms and left records of 
what they saw. And the establishment of the Portuguese power 
followed by the advent of the trading companies of other European 
nations, whose factors gained intimate knowledge of the industries 
of the country, also resulted in the collection and recording of 
much valuable information on the economic conditions of South 
India in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Much of this 








had a fort and settlement at Cochin where they repaired their ships 
and built new ones ‘in as great perfection as on the Lisbon strand’. 
The Italian Varthema (1505) noted that an immense quantity of 
cotton was produced near Cambay so that every year forty or 
fifty vessels were laden with cotton and silk to be carried to differ- 
ent countries. Carnelians and diamonds also came to Cambay 
from mountains at six and nine days’ journey from there. At 
Cannanore — another fine, large city — the king of Portugal had a 
strong castle; and there horses from Persia disembarked. On 
every one, customs duty of 25 ducats had to be paid before they 





324 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

makes the very true remark: ‘albeit the country is but small, yet 
it is so fulfilled of people, that it may well be called one town from 
Mount Dely to Coulam’ (Quilon). Caesar Frederick (1567) found 
much silk imported into Cochin from China, and sugar from 
Bengal. According to Ralph Fitch (1583-91) merchandUe 
carried to Goa in a ship wherein were horses paid no custom in; 
the horses paid custom, and the goods paid nothing’. If there 
were no horses, the goods paid 8 per cent. ‘The Moores cannot 
pass except they have a passport from the Portugals.’ In Chaul 
there was great traffic in all sorts of spices and drugs, silk and cloth 
of silk, sandals, elephants’ teeth and much ‘China work’. Fitch 
calls the palm tree ‘the profitablest tree in the world’ and notices 
the existence in Cambay of hospitals to keep lame dogs and cats, 
and for birds. ‘They will give meat to the ants.’ 

The accounts of one English and two Dutch factors, who spent 
some years in Masulipatam and its neighbourhood, give an un- 
usually vivid picture of the state of industry and trade on the east 
coast, particularly in the Golconda region. The country was 
mainly agricultural; in lowlands the staple crops were rice, millets 
and pulses, while, on a smaller scale, the dye crops, indigo and 
chay-root, were produced for the weaving industry. Tobacco, 
then recently introduced, was grown largely for export. Cotton 
was not grown extensively, but was brought from the interior. 
The chief minerals were iron and steel of high quality, manufac- 
tured some distance inland, and exported from Masulipatam. 
Diamond-mining on an important scale had developed at Kollur. 
Among industries cotton-weaving stood by itself. It was practised 
all over the area, both for local consumption and for export in 
large quantities. The weavers worked in their own houses, 
but as they depended on advances of capital from buyers they had 
to produce the quality and quantity of goods prescribed by their 
customers. There were two main classes of cotton goods — plain 
goods like calico and muslin, brown, bleached or dyed ; and pat- 
terned goods of the type now called ‘prints’ made of either calico 
or muslin, with coloured patterns produced by the indigenous 
processes. This work was carried out mainly on the coasts and 
carefully adapted to the needs of markets in Java and the Far 
East, each with its own peculiar tastes and requirements. The 
export trade for plain goods was localized on the Golconda Coast, 
while Pulicat specialized in the patterned variety. 



tions of the major dynasties of a ‘royal measure ; this doubtless 
implies some effort at standardization. The Rashtrakuta ins- 
criptions, for instance, mention the dramma besides the suvarna 
and the gadyana. The first recalls the Indo-Bactrian drachma , 
a silver coin of 65 grains. In Tamil inscriptions of even the ele- 
venth and twelfth centuries occurs the name tiramam as that 
of a coin, perhaps of silver, which was a fifth or sixth of the standard 
gold coin— the hasu of the Cholas. But golden drammas are 
mentioned in the Rashtrakuta records and their value cannot be 
determined. In general two systems of weights are traceable 
in the ancient coins of South India. The gold gadyana of the 
Deccan averages 58 grains, the heaviest reaching 60.1 grains; this 
was the old gadyana ( kaccanam ) or kalahju (Tamil). But in 
the Chola period the more usual standard was a heavier kalahju 
of twenty mahjadis equal in theory to 72 grains but sometimes 
going up to 80. A coin of this standard was called pou or madai, 
and the kdsu was exactly half of this. But the records contain 
the names of many varieties of madai and kdsu, and it does not 




326 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

and adds: ‘In this country they have three kinds of money, made 
of gold, mixed with alloy: one called varaha weighs about one 
mithhal, equivalent to two dinars, kopeki; the second, which is 
called pertab, is half of the first; the third, called fanom, is equiva- 
lent in value to the tenth part of the last mentioned coin. Of 
these different coins, the fanom is the most useful. They cast 
in pure silver a coin which is the sixth of the fanom , which they 
call tar. This latter is also a very useful coin in currency. A 
copper coin worth the third of a tar, is called djitel. According to 
the practice, adopted in this empire, all the provinces, at a fixed 
period, being their gold to the mint.’ About sixty years later, 
Varthema records other relations among the smaller currency 
units, saying that sixteen tares went to the fanom, and sixteen cas 
to the tare, though he counts twenty fanoms to the pagoda (pardao, 
varaha) all right. Duarte Barbosa pays a high compliment to the 
integrity of the currency system and says: ‘Coins of this place are 
perfectly genuine, not one of them has been ever found false, nor 
is now so found.’ But the multiplicity of currencies persisted 
and caused inconvenience, and Caesar Frederick grumbles that a 
new governor’s country meant new coins, ‘so that the money we 
took this day would not serve the next’. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

T. V. Mahalingam: Administration and Social Life under Vijayanagar 
(Madras, 1940) 

C. Minakshi: Administration and Social Life under the Pallavas (Madras, 
1938) 

Moreland, W. H.: Relations of Golconda in the Early XVII Century 
(Hakluyt Society) (London, 1931) 

Purchas : His Pilgrimages Vol. X (Glasgow, 1912) 

K. A. N. Sastri : The Pandyan Kingdom (London, 1929) 

K. A. N. Sastri r Foreign Notices of South India (Madras, 1939) 

K. A. N. Sastri : The Colas — 2 vols. (Madras, 1935, 1937) 

Sir R. C. Tbmplb (ed.) : The Itinerary of Ludovico di Varthema of Bologna, 
1502-1508 (London, 1928) 

(Madras, 1935) 


in the Third Dynasty of Vijayanagar 






LITERATURE 


1. Sanskrit: Sutras— exegesis — Bhagavata — commentaries on the epics — 
belles-lettres and rhetoric — philosophical literature: Nyaya ; Purvamimamsa ; 
Advaita; Visishtadvaita, Vaishnava and Saiva ; Dvaita — DharmaSastra — 



Jaina; grammar; lexicography; beginnings of ^aiva-siddhanta — fourth period 
(1200-1650): £aiva-siddhanta ; devotional and religious literature, Puranas, 
Vaishnava rahasyas, secular literature, anthology; grammar, commentaries, 

3. Kannada: Before Pampa — ‘The three Gems ’ — Chavundaraya — 
Durgasimha and his contemporaries — Nagachandra — Karnaparya — other Jaina 
writers- • Vira-sai va literature — Vaishnava literature : Dasas — Bhaftakalanka 


4. Telugu: Beginnings of the language and literature — Nannaya and his 



early seventeenth centuries. 


5. Malayalam: Beginnings — Unnuriili Sandesam — folk songs — Rama- 
caritam and Rama Kathappaftu — Sakkiyar Kuttu and Campus — Nirapam poets 
— Cherutferi NambQdiri— local songs and ballads -EJuttaccan— Xathakaji. 

Sanskrit was the language of higher culture throughout South 
India, and a considerable volume of literature in its various 
branches arose from the activity of poets and scholars through the 
centuries. We shall trace the history of this activity in outline 
before proceeding to a study of the literatures in the languages 
of the people, viz. Tamil, Kannada, Telugu and Malayalam, to 
name them in the probable order in which they developed their 
literary idioms. All these literatures owed a great deal to Sanskrit, 
the magic wand whose touch alone raised each of the Dravidian 
languages from the level of a patois to that of a literary idiom, 
and the influence they exercised on one another was also not in- 
considerable; but their interaction cannot be adequately consider- 
ed in the brief sketch that follows. 




32S A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

The beginnings of Marathi literature fall indeed within the 
period dealt with in this book, but they will not be traced here, 
because Marathi is more properly regarded as a North Indian 
vernacular. The bulk of the Marathi literature falling in our 
period was primarily devotional in nature and is represented by 
such authors as Jnanesvara (1290), Namdev (1425), Eknath (1608) 
and Tukaram (1608-49), names greater in the field of religion than 
in that of literature. 

Sanskrit 

The Vedic religion of sacrifice had spread all over the country 
by the beginning of the Christian era, if not earlier, and Vedic 
literature and exegesis therefore naturally claim our first attention 
in the domain of Sanskrit. Apastamba, the author of a complete 
set of irauta, grihya and dharma siitras that has luckily been pre- 
served in its entirety, must have flourished somewhere about 300 
B.c. in the Godavari valley. His language seems to be of an age 
preceding that of Panini, and the followers of his school abound 
in the land south of the Narmada. The school of Satyashadha 
HiranyakeSins, whose Dharmasutra shows clear traces of Apas- 
tamba’s influence, came into prominence in the Sahya region 
(Malabar and S. Kanara?) between the first century B.c. and the 
first century a.d. A third school which can also be definitely 
assigned to South India is that of the Vaikhanasas whose Grihya 
sutra shows many influences of the idiom of the Dravidian 
languages. The manuals of these two schools also are complete. 

The foundation of the Chola and Vijayanagar empires was 
marked by notable efforts to elucidate the Vedas. In the reign of 
Chola Parantaka I, Venkata Madhava, who lived in a village on 
the banks of the Kaveri, wrote the Rigarthadipika. Under the 
patronage of the early Vijayanagar sovereigns, notably Bukka I, 
a large syndicate of scholars, headed by Sayana, undertook and 
completed the stupendous task of commenting upon the Samhitas 
of all the four Vedas and many of the Brahmanas and 
Aranyakas. 

Coming long after the age of the texts they annotated, these 
scholars obviously did not always succeed in interpreting them 
correctly or convincingly; but the most critical of modem scholars 
cannot deny the debt they owe to the commentaries which re- 
corded the traditional interpretations current in the Vedic schools 




nificant fragment has been traced so iar. 

Devaraja’s Nigliantu Vyakhya, written at Srirangam m the 
fifteenth century, marks an important stage in the history ofVedic 
scholarship as it is a very learned exposition of Yaska s celebrated 
treatise on Vedic lexicology. 

Among the Puranas, the Bhagavata was composed somewhere 
■ G n ,i»h Tnrlic about the beginning of the tenth century. It 


summed up the tenets and outlook of the neo-bhakti cult which had 
been developing from the fourth or fifth century in the course of 
the conflict between Hinduism and the non-Vedic creeds of Jainism 
and Buddhism. The Bhagavata combines a simple surging 
emotional bhaktito Krishna with the Advaita philosophy of Sankara 
in a manner that has been considered possible only in the Tamil 
country. The Vishnu Parana, perhaps the shortest and the best 
work of its class, was commented on by Vishnu Chitta in the early 
thirteenth century from the standpoint of Visishtadvaita. We 





Lord of Gayatri. Again, the V almlki-hridaya of Ahobala was 
based on the comments on select verses from the Ramayana 
scattered throughout the Idu. Isvara DIkshita of Kaundinya 
gotra wrote two commentaries on the epic, a laghu and a brihad 
■vivarana in 1517; the work was done at Hemakuta in Vijayanagar 
under the patronage of Krishnadeva Raya. All together about 
a score of commentaries on the Ramayana were produced in 
South India. On the Mahabharata, the Lakshabharana of Vadi- 
raja, written during the latter part of the fourteenth century, 




critics to the period a.d. 200-450; but it may possibly be a revised 
version of an earlier work. Another notable work of the age of the 
Satavahanas was the Brihatkatha of Gunadhya, reputed to have 
been composed in the PaisacI dialect but no longer available 
except through a number of later Sanskrit recensions; many 
legends are told about the composition and fate of the book, 
and its widespread influence on later literature in many languages 
is universally admitted. The tales of the Brihatkatha had for 
their hero Naravahanadatta, a son of Udayana, and borrowed 
motifs from the Ramayana and from Buddhist sources. The work 
seems to have survived till about the eighth or ninth century and 
is highly praised by such famous authors as Bana and Dandin. 

Sundara Pandya’s Nitidvishashtika must be older than the 
sixth century; the author’s identity remains a mystery, but the 
work has great merit and its verses deserve a high place in the 
literature of niti (policy). Kumaradasa’s long poem in twenty 
cantos, Janakiharana , handles the familiar story of Rama; the 
author was clearly an admirer of Kalidasa and his work contains 
many echoes of that great poet. Tradition, late and not very 
reliable, identifies Kumaradasa with a king of Ceylon who ruled in 
the sixth century. This poem has had a curious history; till 
recently it was only known from a Sinhalese paraphrase and a 
retranslation of it into Sanskrit in a poem of fifteen cantos by a 
certain Rajasundara (c. 1600), but the original was recovered re- 
cently in Malabar. Much better known and of greater literary 
merit is Bharavi’s Kiratarjuniyam which describes, in eighteen 
cantos, the conflict between Siva and Arjuna ending in the latter’s 
attainment of the valuable weapon Pasupata astra. The poem 
is remarkable for its vigour and its imagery. In an inscription 



332 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

peer of Bharavi and Kalidasa! A somewhat earlier inscription 
from Mahakuta is composed in ornate prose which could stand 
comparison with Bana. In fact a complete history of Sanskrit 
literature must devote attention to inscriptions as much as to 
books. This is, in fact, equally true for all languages; but it is a 
subject that cannot be pursued here. Vijayabhattarika, the wife 
of king Chandraditya who was a son of Pulakesin 1 1, has been plau- 
sibly identified with the poetess Vijayanka or Vijjika, who describes 
herself as a dark Sarasvati (the Goddess of Learning, usually 
depicted as white), and whom the great critic Rajasekhara placed 
next only to Kalidasa for style. The few verses of this poetess 
which have been preserved in the anthologies go far to justify 
this high estimate. 

The ‘curious-minded’ Pallava ruler of Kanchi, Mahendravar- 
man I, found time to compose two delectable farces (prahasanas), 




composed other works of an erudite nature; but by this poem he 
lives in the hearts of Sanskritists. 

The great Jaina writer Somadevasuri (950) flourished in the 
court of Arikesari II of Vemulavada (Hyderabad State), a sub- 
ordinate of Rashtrakuta Krishna III, where the illustrious Kannada 
poet Pampa also lived. Somadeva was the author of Y asastilaka 
catnpu, Nitivakyamrita, and other works. The tale of the Campu 
is by no means dull, but the main objective of the author is the 
propagation of Jaina tenets and ethics. The Nitivakyamrita 
reviews the subject-matter of Arthasastra from the standpoint 
of Jaina morals. The author’s style is at once learned, pithy and 







of Bilhana, the Kashmirian Vidyapati of Vikramaditya VI, is a 
Mahakavya in eighteen cantos, which recounts in epic style the 
life and deeds of the Chalukyan emperor. The author gives his 
own life-history in the last canto and says that he composed the poem 
out of gratitude for the great honour shown to him late in his life 
by the ruler of Karnata. Not all its statements on the relations of 
Vikramaditya with his elder brother SomeSvara can be accepted 
as true, but the verse is easy and flowing though the descriptions 
are disproportionately long. Bilhana has written other works 
from which citations have survived in anthologies; but there is no 
proof that the Pancatika , a moving though somewhat outspoken 
portrayal of the pleasures of illicit love, can properly be attributed 
to him. Purporting to be the work of Chalukya Someivara III, 
but most likely a composition of one or more of his court-poets, is 
the Manasollasa or Abhilashitartha cintamani (1129-30), intended 
for the benefit of all classes in the state. It consists of five books 
of twenty chapters each. Its range is cyclopaedic, and obviously 






yumna and PrabhavatJ, and was the patron of Saraudrabandha, 
the author of a learned commentary on the Alankarasarvasva 
of Ruyyaka. 

Similar in spirit and manner are two works on dramaturgy, 
both composed about 1300 and both including a play calculated 
to glorify the author’s patron and illustrate the rules of the drama: 
these are the Ekavali of Vidyadhara, written under Narasimha II 



summary of the Bhdgavata; and Nalakirtikaumudi_ 
the familiar story of Nala and Damayantl. Visvanatha, the author 
of Sahityadarpana, a comprehensive wort covering the entire 
field of poetics, flourished (c. 1350) in the court of one Narasimha, 
probably the third king of that name to rule over Onssa. 

The achievements of Kumara Kampana, the second son of 
Bukka I of Vijayanagar, are celebrated in a beautiful poem by his 
wife GangadevI — Madhuravijayam (‘Conquest of Madura’). One 
ofVidyaranya’s pupUs wasVamana Bhatta Bana, patronized by the 
Reddi king Pedda Komati Verna of Kondavidu (1398-1415), 
whom he celebrated in a prose romance of considerable length, 
the Vemabhupdla-carita. The author’s aim was to rival Bana as a 
prose writer, and he achieved a notable measure of success in his 
endeavour. His other works were Nalabhyudaya, Pdrvati-pari- 
naya, and two plays Raghundtha-carita-kavya, and Kanakalekha 
Kalydna. The Reddi ruler Pedda Komati himself passes as the 
author of commentaries on Amaruiataka, a centum of erotic verses, 
and Saptasati-sara — a selection of 100 verses from Hala’s Prakrit 
anthology; two independent works on poetics and music, Sdhitya- 
cintamani and Sangita-cintamani are also attributed to him. Like 
him, his predecessor Kumaragiri was also author and patron; he 
wrote a work on natya (dance) called Vasantardjiya, after one of 
his titles. His brother-in-law (and minister) Katayavema wrote 
well-known commentaries on the plays of Kalidasa. 

Passing over several minor works of poetry, drama and criti- 
cism of the early Vijayanagar period, we may notice the Rasarna- 
vasudhakara, a masterly treatise on rasa and the rules of drama- 
turgy. This work is said to be by Simhabhupala of Rajakonda 
{c. 1350), but possibly owes much to his court-poet Viiveivara, 
who wrote Camatkaracandrika — also a good manual of rhetoric. 
The family of Dindimas in the village of Mullandram in North 




with Varadambika. 


The next great name is that of Appaya Dikshita (1520-92), 
author of over a hundred works in many branches of Sanskrit 
learning, who was patronized by the Nayak chieftains of Vellore, 
particularly by Chinna Bomma. His commentary on the Yadava- 
bhyudaya has been mentioned already. Other contributions 
which he made to poetry and poetics include Citramimamsa 
and Lakshanavali on literary criticism and the appreciation of 
poetry; the Kuvalayananda which, though in form an amplifica- 
tion of Jayadeva’s Candraloka, almost attains the level of an inde- 
pendent treatise on figures of speech ; Vrittivarttika, a treatise on 
the significance of words in their poetic use; Varadarajastava, 





\ HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 


Yainanarayana, wrote two works on the life of Raghunatha 
Nayaka — a poem Sahityaratnakara, and a drama in five acts, 
Raghunatha Vilasa; the other, Venkatamakhi, was a versatile 
writer on all Sastras, but his Kavya Sdhityasdmrajya is not avail- 
able, Raghunatha Nayaka himself composed several works like 
Parijataharana , Valmikicarita, Gajendra-moksha, Nalacarita and 
Acyutendrdbhyudaya, the last being obviously a biography of his 
father. He also wrote on music. The Raghundthdbhyudaya 
of Ramabhadramba also has the life of the Nayaka for its theme 
and gives clear proof of the intense devotion that the ruler evoked 
in the talented poetess. 

Yet another family of DIkshitas rose to literary fame under 
the Nayaks of Gingee. Ratnakheta Srinivasa DIkshita of Satya- 
mangalam is reputed to have written eighteen plays and sixty 
i 1.„ have heen lost, however: his alle- 






LITERATURE 339 

popular manual of logic, Tarkasangraha (c. 1625), and the gloss 
Dipika on it were the work of Annambhatta, a native of the 
Chittoor district who also wrote commentaries on other classics 
on this subject. 

The popularity of Purva-MImamsa studies in the South is 
indicated by a number of inscriptions recording endowments — 
particularly in favour of the school of Prabhakara, who was the 
pupil as well as the rival of the great Kumarila, the founder of 
these studies in this part of the country. Kumarila is generally 
regarded as an Andhra by birth and an elder contemporary of 
Sankaracarya (eighth century); his main works are Slokavarttika, 
Tantravarttika, and Tuptika which together form a complete 
commentary on the classic Bhashya of Sabarasvamin on the Mi- 
mamia sutras of Jaimini. Prabhakara (a native of North Travan- 
core according to tradition) also wrote two commentaries on 
Sahara’s Bhashya, a short Laghvi or Vivarana, no longer extant, 
and a more extensive Brihati or Nibandhana which has survived 
in part and gives unmistakable evidence of the author’s originality 
and dialectical skill. Mandana Misra, another elder contemporary 
of Sankara, discussed two fundamental topics of Mimamsa in his 
Vidhiviveka and Bhavanaviveka. The Bhashyadipa of Kshlra- 
sagaramisra (eleventh century) is another commentary on Sahara 
written from the standpoint of Prabhakara; the same writer also 
composed a tract called Arthavadadivicdra. Varadaraja, as noted 
already, expounded the tenets of the same school towards the 
close of the twelfth century. The volume of Mimamsa literature 
that developed in South India is very great and cannot be reviewed 
here in its entirety. Only the names of the most important authors 
and their works can be noted. They are: Someivara’s Nyaya- 
sudha ( c . 1200), an elaborate commentary on Kumarila’s Tantra- 
varttika; another commentary on the same work — the Nyayapdra- 
yana (mid-thirteenth century) of Gangadhara-misra ; the Mimam- 
sapaduka and Sesvaramimamsd of Vedanta De4ika, who sought to 
synthesize the views of the two rival schools; the Nydyamald and 
its vistara by Sayana’s brother Madhava (fourteenth century), 
an abstract in verse and an explanation in prose on the subject- 
matter of each section of Sahara’s Bhashya, a number of tracts 
on Mimamsa by Appaya DIkshita such as Vidhirasdyana, Upa- 
kramaparakrama and V ddanakshatramala besides his Mayiikhavali 
a commentary on the Sdstradipika, a classic exposition of the 



bankara, ine xuunaer ui nuv<ma . " . , 

authentic details of liis life are known, though he is believed to 
have been bom at Kaladi (North Travancore) in 788 and to have 
died in 820 at the age of 32. His principal works are the great 
Bhashyas on the Brahma-siitras, the principal Upanishads, and 
the Bhagavadgita, besides certain independent treatises like the 
Upadesa-sahasri. Many other works, particularly Stotras (devo- 
tional poems), pass as his but there is no reason to think that 
Sankara wrote them. The literary force and philosophic depth 
of Sankara’s works entitle him to a very high place among the 
master minds of the world. His pupil Suresvara, who may per- 
haps be identified with ViSvarupa, wrote the commentary Bdla- 
kridd on Yajnavalkyasmriti. He also succinctly restated his master’s 
fundamental principles in his Naishkarmyasiddhi , and wrote 
monumental varttikas (elucidations) on Sankara’s Bhashyas on the 
Taittiriya and the Brihadaranyaka Upanishads. Sankara had other 
pupils who became authors; but their provenance is unknown. 
Mention may be made, however, of Padmapada’s Pancapadika, 
a commentary on Sankara’s Bhashya on the Brahma-siitras; 
the work is now only available for the first four Sutras. Mandana 
MUra, whom we have already mentioned as a contemporary of 
Sankara, held different views on Advaita which he expressed in 




like Stotraratna, a devotional poem. The true founder of the 
system in its entirety was of course Sri Ramanuja (b. 1018) 
whose Sribhashya on the Brahma-sutras is its great classic. He 
also annotated the Bhagavadgita from his point of view, and wrote 
the Vedarthasangraha to demonstrate that the Upanishads support 





snana , sicarya nr way a, ana i auvavweRa , Desiaes many worms in 
Tamil, and founder of the Tengalai (southern branch) sampra- 
daya. A third pupil of Nadadur Ammal was Atreya Ramanuja 
(6. 1 220), author of Nyayakulisa which seeks to establish doctrines 
of general Vedanta, and emphasizes the differences between 
Advaita and Vigishtadvaita only in some of its chapters. His 
other works have not survived. A nephew (sister’s son) and pupil 
of Atreya Ramanuja was the famous Vedanta Desika (1268-1369) 
who wrote commentaries on Ramanu ja’s Sri-bhashya ( Tattva-tika ) 



LITERATURE 343 

whose Sruti-sukti-mala (also called Caturvedatatparya-sangraha) 
delineates the salient features of Saiva thought, whde his Hanhara- 
taratamya is a sectarian polemic. He was followed by Srikantha 
whose Brahma-mimamsa-bhashya expounds the Sutras of Badara- 
yana from the Saiva viewpoint. Srikantha may well be identical 
with the dcarya who, according to Aghorasivacarya, came down 
from Gauda to worship Nataraja at Chidambaram and whom 
Vikrama Chola adopted as his guru. There are notable verbal 
coincidences between Srikantha’s Bhashya and the Srl-bhdshya oi 
Ramanuja. Srikantha’s system is called Sivadvaita to distinguish 
it from the Saiva Siddhanta system developed in the Tamil books. 
Attempts have been made to treat both the systems as one, but 
they cannot be regarded as successful. Aghorasivacarya’s (c. 1158) 
commentaries on Tattvaprakdsikd of Bhojadeva and on the highly 
philosophic Mrigendrdgama are important in the history of Saiva 
philosophy. Umapatisivacarya’s (c. 1290-1320) Bhashya on the 
Paushkara Samhila is a powerful plea that Siva is the one deity 
for everyone to worship. JnanasivacSrya of the matha at Surya- 
narkoyil in the Tanjore district, and preceptor of Sevvappa 
Nayaka of Tanjore, commented on the Sivajnanabodha, not the 
Tamil work of Meykandar, but a section of the Raurava Agama, 
from the more usual Saiva-siddhanta standpoint; the commentary 
is notable for its many valuable citations from works no longer 
extant. His other works were Saiva Paribhdshd, a manual in five 
sections on the categories of Saivism, and the Sivagrapaddhati 
and Kriyddlpikd on the rituals of worship and renunciation. 
Srikantha’s work was carried further by Nilakantha (c. 1400) 
whose Kriyasara is a metrical compendium of Srikantha’s Bhashya 
which attempts to discover common ground between his system 
and that of the Vira-Saivas; and by Appaya Dikshita’s striking 
contributions to Saiva philosophy, particularly in his monumental 
commentary on Srikantha called the Sivarkamanidipika. 

The philosophy of Dvaita (dualism) was elaborated by Madhva, 
also called Ananda Tirtha (1198-1275), in his Bhashya on the 
Brahma-sutras and in the Anuvyakhya, a further commentary 
supporting the conclusions of the Bhashya; he also conamented 
on the Upanishads and the Bhagavadgita, and wrote an epitome of 
the Mahabharata entitled Bhdratatdtparyanirnaya, besides a 
commentary on some hymns of the Rigveda called Rigveda- 
vydkhyd. He wrote also a number of polemical works rebutting 


was also called SureSvara, was a pupil of Sankara. Another writer 
of fairly early date was Bharuci who commented on the Vishnu 
Dharmasutras and Manusmriti ; the first work is lost and the second 
was only recently recovered in a fragmentary form. Perhaps the 
greatest name in this sphere is that of Vijnanesvara who adorned 
the court of Chalukya Vikramaditya VI ; his Mitakshara , a com- 
mentary on Yajnavalkya, is an important treatise on law based on 
many earlier writings and it has found acceptance in the whole 
of South India and large parts of the North. The work was com- 
mented on more than once by subsequent writers; Colebrooke, 





TIrtha, Moksha and Parisesha. Two more sections on Prayascitta 
(expiation) and Vyavahara (civil law) are supposed to have been 
compiled by him though they are not now forthcoming. The 
published portion covers over 6,ooo pages and forms perhaps the 
most extensive digest on the subjects it treats of. Part of the 
glory that was Vijayanagar was the work of Madhava, the brother 
of Sayana, whose commentary on Parasarasmriti, the Parasara 
Madhaviya, is a most erudite work which includes an independent 
treatise on Vyavahara which was neglected in the text of Parasara. 
And Sayana himself wrote a number of lesser manuals called 
Sudhanidhis treating of Prayascitta (expiatory rites), Yajnatantra 
(Vedic ritual), Purushartha (the aims of human endeavour) and 
so on. The two brothers wrote in the first half of the fourteenth 
century. Dalapati’s extensive work in twelve sections, Nrisimha- 
prasada, deals with all phases of religious and civil law; Dalapati 
(1490-1533) was a highly placed Hindu officer in the Nizam 
Shahi court of Ahmadnagar. Prataparudra Gajapati of Orissa 
composed the Sarasvati-vildsa with the avowed intention of 
reconciling the apparent discrepancies between the views of 
Vijnane^vara, Apararka, Bharuci and other authors who preceded 
him. Only the Vyavahara section of this work has been found. 
The Smritiratnakara of Harita Venkatacarya (Tolappar) (1450- 
1500), a native of the Chingleput district which was so prolific 
of Vaishnava scholars, is accepted to this day as an authoritative 
exposition of religious law by the Vaishnavas of the South. 



346 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Vaidyanathu DIkshita’s Smritimuktaphala, written probably 
early in the seventeenth century, holds a similar position 
among the Smartas. In the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries under the Nayak rulers of South India many other 
works were written in the field of Dharmasastra as in other 
branches of literature. 

In lexicography, the Vaijayanti of Yadavaprakasa, the teacher 
of Ramanuja, has commanded great authority in the eyes of later 
authors; it is a work in two sections— one on synonyms and the 
other on homonyms. Dhananjaya, a Digambara Jaina writer 
(1150) of Karnataka, compiled the Namamala, a lexicon of syn- 
onyms in about two hundred verses. Jataveda DIkshita (1250), 
also from Karnataka, annotated the Amarakoia in his Brihadvritti. 
Lastly, Vamana Bhatta Bana, whose writings in prose and drama 
have been noted already, produced two lexicons of merit — Sabda- 
ratndkara and Sabdacandrika. 

In grammar, Sarvavarman, a reputed contemporary of 
Gunadhya in the Satavahana court, wrote the Katantra sutras, a 
simplified system of grammar, for the benefit of his patron and 
thus began the Katantra school which flourished subsequently 
more in Bengal than anywhere else. Another system that arose 
in the South was that of Sakatayana, of the reign of the RashtrakQta 
Amogavarsha I (a.d. 817-77); he wrote the Sabdanuiasana in four 
chapters as also a commentary on it called Amoghavritti after his 
patron, besides the ancillary treatises needed to complete his new 
system. The earliest South Indian writer on the system ofPanini 
was Haradatta (ninth century) whose commentary Padamanjari 
on the Kdsika of Vamana and Jayaditya is a work of outstanding 
merit and authority. In the thirteenth century a certain Krishna- 
lllaSuka wrote a commentary called Purushakdra on the Daiva 
of Deva, a terse metrical treatise in 200 verses on roots of similar 
form. The commentary describes itself as a varttika and deserved- 
ly enjoys a high place among grammatical works. The Madhavlya- 
dhatuvritti of Madhava, the great commentator on the Vedas, is a 
commentary on the Dhatupdtha (list of roots) of Panini which, by 
the way, suggests the derivation of quite a large number of words 
whose origin is not given in any other work. The Siddhdnta 
Kaumudi of Bhattoji DIkshita, a younger contemporary of Appaya 
DIkshita, is today the most popular manual of Sanskrit grammar. 
The Prakriyasarvasva of the polymath Narayana Bhattatiri (1616) 



LITERATURE 347 

enjoys as much popularity in Kerala as the Siddhanta Kaumudi 
does outside that area. 

This sketch may be concluded with a brief notice of the more 
important Sanskrit treatises on music and dance. The musical 
inscription of Kudumiyamalai (Pudukkottai), which consists of 
exercises to be practised on stringed instruments, has been with 
good reason assigned to Pallava Mahendravarman I ; we read at the 
end of the inscription that it was the work of a Saiva monarch 
who was the pupil of Rudracarya, evidently a famous music master 
of the early seventh century. Chalukya Jagadekamalla (1138-50) 
of KalyanI wrote the Sangitacudamani, a work in five chapters. 
In the reign of the Yadava Singhana (1210-47) of Devagiri Sarn- 
gadeva wrote a work of outstanding merit, Sangltaratndkara. 
The book in its seven chapters covers the whole range of music 
and dance. Jayasenapati, a general of Kakatlya Ganapati, com- 
posed the Nrittaratnavali (1254), in eight chapters on Dancing. 
Harapala-deva, an unidentified Chalukya prince, was the author of 
Sangita-sudhakara on dance and music. The fine arts received 
great encouragement from the rulers of Vijayanagar and thtir 
feudatories, and the theory and practice of music and dancing 
made notable advances. The great Vidyaranya wrote the Sangl- 
tasdra. Kallinatha, a writer on music, flourished under Mallikar- 
juna, and his grandson Rama Amatya who wrote the Svara-mela- 
kalanidhi was patronized by Rama Raya. The Sanglta-suryodaya 
was the work of Lakshmlnarayana, the court-musician of Krishna- 
deva Raya. The Sangita-sudha, composed by Govinda DIkshita 
in the name of Raghunatha Nayaka, and the Caturdandiprakasika 
of VenkateSvara Makhi, the son of Govinda DIkshita, are works of 
outstanding merit produced in the Nayak Court of Tanjore. 

From very early times South India held an important place in 
the evolution of Indian music. Even the early writer Bharata 
mentions a melody-mould known as Andhri-jati and details of 
other early southern modes are recorded by later writers like 
Matanga and Sarngadeva. The large place of choric singing in 
the religious revival of the seventh and eighth centuries is well- 
known. The great musician and composer Gopala Nayak was 
invited to Northern India by Ala-ud-din Khilji at the instance of 
Amir Khusru. Kallinatha cites a composition of Gopala Nayak 
called Raga Kadamba, and Venkatamakhi states that he claimed to 
be the promulgator of Caturdandi, that is, a fourfold delineation 




works in Sanskrit or allied dialects were translated or adapted 
into Tamil. There was a preponderance of Jaina writers to start 
with as Jainism and Buddhism were then waxing strong. But 
the rising tide of Hindu reaction soon produced a great volume of 
popular devotional literature, which was set to music and ravished 
the hearts of the common folk. Notable developments occurred in 
belles-lettres, grammar and lexicography, but here the Jains and 
Buddhists continued to hold the palm. Almost all writing was 
in verse, and there was little prose worth mentioning. 

Most of the important didactical works composed in the period 
have been grouped together under the title ‘The eighteen ktlkka- 
nakku’ from about the thirteenth century, because of their being 
composed in various short metres, generally types of the venba. 
Certainly the best known of them all, and possibly also among 
the earliest, is the Rural of Tiruvaljuvar, a comprehensive manual 
of ethics, polity and love. It contains 1,330 distichs divided into 
133 sections of ten distichs each — the first 38 on ethics ( aram ), 
the following 70 on political and economic topics (porul) and the 
rest on love ( kamam ). The author was most probably a learned 
Jaina divine and his close acquaintance with the works of Manu, 
Kautilya and Vatsyayana is unmistakable. We have little authen- 
tic information of his life, and the great merits and continued 
influence of his work have naturally led to the growth of many 




350 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

popular legends around his name. If, as is often affirmed, he 
and some other writers of this age belonged to a Sangam, it must 
have been a later institution than the one which flourished in 
the early centuries of the Christian era: 450-500 may be suggested 
as the best date for the Kural. To the same period must be assign- 
ed the Kalavali of Poygaiyar, already noticed, and the Mudumo- 
likkanji , a short work of too stanzas on mutability by Kudalur- 
kilar of Madura. 

" The age of the remaining works in the collection may be given, 
tentatively and within broad limits, as follows: between 550 and 
650 —Karnarpadu, Inna-narpadu , Aindinai-aimbadu, Naladi, Nan- 
manikkadigai, and Palamoli; between 650 and 750— Tirikadukam, 
Aindinai-yelubadu, Tinai-malai-aimbadu , Kainnilai , Eladi, Tinai- 
malai-nurraimbadu, Eirupaiicamulam, Iniya-narpadu and Aiarak- 
kovai. The figures narpadu (40), aimbadu (50), and so on, with 
which some of these names end indicate the number of stanzas 
in the work. The Kar-narpadu is a love poem in which a love- 
lorn lady is supposed to describe the dreadful approach of the 
rainy reason in the absence of her lover; the four other poems 
whose titles contain the word tinai , as well as Kaninilai, are also 
on the theme of love and belong to the class of aham works. 
Inna-narpadu and Iniya-narpadu are catalogues of painful and un- 
pleasant, and pleasurable and joyous, things and deeds respectively. 
Naladi is a Jaina anthology (400 verses) put together by Padumanar 
and arranged in forty chapters on the lines of the Kural; the names 
of the poets whose songs are collected are unknown, but the refer- 
ence to Muttaraiyar in two of the stanzas gives the clue to the date 
of the collection. Nanmanikkadigai (100 stanzas) by a Vaishnava 
poet, Vilambi Naganar, contains four sententious statements in 
each stanza; it is a work of high literary merit and ranks next only 
to the Kural. The Palamoli is a Jaina work of 400 venbas, each 
citing a proverb and mentioning some incident or story to illus- 
trate it. Tirikadukam (‘three pungents’), Eladi (cardamom 
and others) and Eirupancamulam (“the five minor roots’) take their 
names from well-known medicinal preparations; just as the medi- 
cines cure the illnesses of the body and restore health, the morals 
inculcated in these works cure the diseases of mind and spirit and 
set the reader on the road to virtue and happiness. The author of 
Tirikadukam was a worshipper of Vishnu; the other two works 
were by Jains. The Aiarakkdvai is a veritable Tamil smriti by a 



LITERATURE 


351 


Saiva author based avowedly on Sanskrit originals. It is among 
the latest, if not the last, work of this type in this period. 

The widespread Hindu religious revival for which many 
Saiva nayandrs and Vaishnava altars worked together furnished a 
powerful stimulus to the growth of a popular devotional literature. 
It was of great importance alike for its volume and for its influence 
on the life of the people. Groups of devotees headed by some 
prominent religious leader moved from place to place and shrine 
to shrine singing hymns they composed in the course of these 
pilgrimages. The result was the use of simple diction and catchy 
tunes. In this golden age of Tamil Hinduism there must have 
come into existence a much larger volume of literature than has 
been preserved in the canonical editions of hymns made in the 
tenth century by Nambi Andar Nambi for the Saiva group, and 
Nathamuni for the Vaishnava. For instance, a hymn of Nanasam- 
bandar, which is unknown to the canonical collection, is found 
engraved on stone in the temple at Tiruvidaiyavayil in the Tanjore 
district. 

Perhaps the earliest author in the group whose works have 
entered the Saiva canon is Karaikkal Ammai, ‘the woman of 
Karaikkal’. Tradition makes her the contemporary of Pudam, one 
of the early alvars, and both may be assigned to about 550. The 
Ammai sang the praises of the deity of Tiruvalangadu where she 
witnessed the dance of Siva. The two other poems she wrote 
which mark the beginning of Prabandha literature in Tamil — a 
genre which counted in course of time no fewer than ninety-six 
types — are Tiru-irattai-mani-malai with twenty pairs of stanzas 
each including a Kalitturai verse and a tenba and the Adbhutat- 
tiruvandadi of 100 venba verses. Next comes Aiyadigal Kadavar- 
kon who is reputed to have handed over the rule of his principality 
to his son and devoted himself to a religious life. His Kshetrat- 
tiruvenba is an andadi (a poem in which the last word or syllable 
of one verse recurs at the beginning of the next) and contains a list 
of twenty-one Saiva shrines including Ujjain (Makajam) which 
were held in esteem in his day. The 307 padigams (hymns) of 
Appar constitute books 4-6 of the Saiva canon. They contain 
many notable anticipations of the Saiva-siddhanta philosophical 
system; the intensity of devotion that characterizes them is 
excelled only in the Tiruvasagam of Manikka-vasagar. Nanasam- 
bandar, the most celebrated Saiva hymnist, heads the canon, and 



352 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

384 hymns sung by him constitute its first three sections. It is 
said that he began singing hymns of his own composition at the 
age of three, and that he met Appar and Siruttondar in person, 
but the story of his meeting with the Vaishnava saint Tirumangai 
seems to be no more than a beautiful legend. Sambandar’s hymns 
are marked by an exceptionally high literary quality but towards 




LITERATURE 


353 

at Kailas after the nayanar reached the sacred mountain in the 
company of Sundaramurti. 

Last but by no means least of the Saiva saints of this period 
who earned themselves an abiding place in the literature and 
hearts of the Tamils was Manikka-vasagar whose Tiruvasagam 
forms the eighth book of the canon, to which some would add his 
Tirukkovai also. The transparent sincerity of the passionate 
outpourings of the saint in the Tiruvasagam makes a deep im- 
pression on the reader’s mind, and the fifty-one hymns, in spite 
of their many strange mythical allusions, strike him as a true 
record of a vivid religious experience which traces the progress 
of a soul from the bondage of passion and ignorance to the liberty 
of light and love. The supreme power of divine grace to liberate 
the soul is the main theme. Some would trace Christian in- 
fluences in the trend of the saint’s thought and feeling; the parallel 
with some aspects of Christian experience is clear enough, but 
of any direct borrowing there is no proof; and on the whole 
the differences are more important than the resemblances. 
The Tirukkovai is among the earliest of the full-fledged kovais 
which treat of love in a schematic poem of 400 stanzas, each depict- 
ing a particular situation. Manikka-vasagar’s poem has a double 
meaning throughout, the main theme being the love of the soul 
for God. Some are inclined to doubt the authorishp of the poem, 
which is however marked by a devotional intensity not unworthy 
of the author of the Tiruvasagam, though its diction is less popular. 
The Karikkovai of Kari-nayanar and the Muttaraiyar-kovai 
mentioned in the commentary to the Yapparungalam (tenth cen- 
tury) may be earlier than Tirukkovai , but they are no longer 
extant; and the Pandikkovat, also perhaps an earlier poem, is 
available only in numerous citations. 

Side by side with the Saiva nayandrs, the Vaishnava alvars also 
laboured along the same lines for the revival of Hinduism, and 
their devotional songs constitute in their final redaction the 
‘Four Thousand Sacred Hymns’ — Nalayira Divyaprabandham. 
The three earliest alvars were Poygai, Pudam, and Pey, and later 
literary tradition avers that Pudam was the contemporary of 
Karaikkal Ammai. These saints are each represented by one 
andadi of one hundred venbas, remarkable for their non-sectarian 
outlook and for the purity and gentleness of their devotion. 
Then came TirumalUai, a contemporary of Mahendravarman I, 




Kulasekhara are said to have been contemporaries, but we may 
well doubt this. KulaSekhara calls himself king of Kongar, 
Kudal and Koli in his poems. He was the author of a notable 
devotional poem in Sanskrit, Mtikundamald, besides the 105 
Tamil verses forming the Perumal Tirumoli in the Tamil canon of 
the Vaishnavas. The VeUala saint Nammalvar, also called Satha- 
kopa, and his Brahmin pupil Madhurakavi were the latest of the 
alvars. Nammalvar’s work is held in the highest respect as it is 
believed to embody the deepest philosophical truths taught by the 
Upanishads. The 1,101 stanzas comprising the TiruvaymoVi hold 
the place of honour and have been most elaborately commented 




LITERATURE 


355 


on by later expositors of the Visishtadvaita system of philosophy. 
The Tiruvdsiriyam, Tiruviruttam and Tiruvandadi are other works 
comprising together less than 200 stanzas. They relate to the 
deities of some thirty shrines, of which all but six are found in the 
Pandya and Chera countries. Nammalvar was a yogi , and his 
Tiruvdymoli is replete with a convincing narration of his mystical 
experiences. Like the other alvars, he delights in the contem- 
plation of the avatars of Vishnu and their achievements, and his 
handling of themes from the lives of Rama and Krishna has found 
expression in some very charming child poetry. Not only as 
philosopher and mystic, but even as a pure literary artist, Nammal- 
var takes a very high rank. Nathamuni, the first of the acaryas 
of the next epoch, is said to have been his pupil and received 
from him the entire canon of 4,000 hymns. The other pupil, 
Madhurakavi, himself an alvar, wrote only one hymn in praise of 
his guru. It is quite probable that the last two alvars lived for 
many years after 850, the limit of our second period. 

In the field of general literature , the three most outstanding 
works are by Jaina and Buddhist authors. The Silappadikaram 
is an unsurpassed gem, though its authorship and date are not 
free from besetting doubts. The work is in some ways unique 
in the whole range of Tamil literature, and the vivid portraiture 
of its scenes and its skilful metrical effects are practically unknown 
to any other work. Its theme is an old popular saga, the story of 
a merchant prince, Kovalan, who neglects his wife Kannagi and 
loses his fortune through love of the celebrated hetaera Madhavi 
of Puhar. A quarrel between the lovers sends Kovalan back to 
his wedded wife, and they both migrate from Puhar to Madura 
to start a new life with the money to be raised by the sale of Kan- 
nagi’s jewels — particularly her precious anklet ( silambu ) which 
gives the name to the poem. As the result of the machinations 
of the royal goldsmith, Kovalan is suspected of being the thief 
who stole the queen’s anklet from the palace and is cut down by 
the king’s officers in the streets of Madura. When Kannagi hears 
the news, she rushes to the palace with the second anklet as 
proof of Kovalan’s innocence. The king realizes his injustice 
and dies of a broken heart. Kannagi wreaks her vengence on 
Madura by consigning the city to flames, and moves into the Chera 
country where she is received into heaven with her husband. 
Senguttuvan enshrines her as the Goddess of Chastity. Despite 



several centuries between that age and that of the Silappadikaram 
and Manimekalai. 

The Perungadai (Sanskrit, Brihat-kathd) of Kongu-VeHr is 
another great poem by a Jaina author, of which only parts are 
available. It tells of the adventures of Naravanadatta, the son 
of the celebrated Udayana of Ujjain, and is apparently based on a 
Sanskrit original which was a rendering of Gunadhya’s famous 
poem in the PaisacI dialect. The Western Ganga king Durvinita 
is said to have composed a Sanskrit version of that work at the end 
of the fifth century. As a narrative poem the Perungadai has 
exceptional merits and is deservedly popular. Valaiyapati and 
KundalakeB are the names of two other Jaina Kavyas in Tamil 
which have been lost but were once counted among the five 
great Kavyas. The commentary on the Ydpparungalam, a Jaina 
grammar of the next period, cites many works on grammar by 
Jaina authors which must have been composed at this time; so 
also the commentary on the Viraioliyam, a Buddhist grammatical 
work of the eleventh century, cites verses from many Buddhist 
Kavyas of this period no longer accessible to us. 

The commentary on the Iraiyandr Ahapporul traditionally as- 
cribed to Nakklrar must have been composed late in this period. 






LITERATURE 


357 


It is worthy oi note as the earliest of the great prose commentaries 
which occupy so conspicuous a place in the development of Tamil 
prose. The style of the commentaries is by no means easy or 
popular, and is often marred by the authors’ desire to show off 
their learning and by their straining after alliteration ; the earliest 
commentary exhibits in full all the demerits of this class of writing. 

The M uttollayiram must have been a work of 900 venhds, 
made up of 300 verses in praise of each of the three monarchs of the 
Tamil country'. It is now known only from about 100 verses, 
which are often very good poetry, cited by different writers, but 
its authorship cannot be traced. The Tagadiir-Ydttirai is 
another lost work of the age, which is likewise only known from 
stray citations. Its theme was the war between the Chera 
monarch and Adigaiman of Tagadur which took place relatively 
late in the Sangam Age. 

Finally, mention must be made of two works of the time of 
Pallava Nandivarman III. The anonymous A andikkalambakam, 
that has come down with many interpolations, is a quasi- 
historical poem of about eighty stanzas dealing, in various 
metres, with events of the reign of the last great Pallava monarch. 
The Bharatam of Perundevanar of which only a small part has 
survived raises questions which cannot now be satisfactorily 
answered. The extant portions include the whole of the Udyoga 
and Bhlshma parvas, and part of the Drona parva ,— to the battle 
on the thirteenth day. The work consists of veiibas interspersed 
with connecting prose passages, and thus attains the form of a 
Campu. But it has been doubted if the poetry and prose are from 
the same pen, and the problem is complicated by the fact that the 
Bharatam was rendered into Tamil by a Perundevanar in the 
Sangam Age. The present work, poetry and prose taken together, 
is a straightforward and simple narrative of the main story not 
devoid of eloquence and charm. It may well be that the entire work 
was written by a single author in the ninth century, his poetry 
conforming to a long-established tradition regarding its diction, 
while his prose was modelled on the style of the learned commen- 
taries, the only prose then known. 

The age of the imperial Cholas (850-1200) was the golden 
age of Tamil culture, and it was naturally marked by the widespread 
practice and patronage of literature. The Prabandha form became 
dominant and the systematic treatment of Saiva-siddhanta in 



and poet Tiruttakkadevar was composed early in the tenth century. 
It follows late ninth-century Sanskrit originals and tells the life 
story of Jivaka, an ideal hero, equally distinguished in the arts 
of war and peace, the perfect saint no less than the charming lover. 
After a stormy youth marked by many adventures Jivaka finds 
himself, in the prime of life, the monarch of a splendid kingdom. 
For some years thereafter he leads a life of pleasure in the company 




LITERATURE 


by writing it. He is thought to have been a Chola prince by birth. 
Another Jaina writer of the time was 1 olamoli (‘a man of unsur- 
passed eloquence’) whose Sulamatii handles a Jaina puranic 
theme in very mellifluous verse and is counted among the five 
minor Kavyas of Tamil literature. 

Kalladanar, the author of Kalladam, must be distinguished 
from his namesake of the Sangam Age. He can perhaps be 
identified with the author who figures in the eleventh book of the 
Saiva canon. Kalladam is a place-name and possibly the writer 
was bom there. He is said to have chosen one hundred verses 
from the Tirukkovai as the basis of his work which deals with the 
sixty-four sacred sports of Siva. The style of the work is very 
stilted as a result of the author’s attempt to revive the poetic forms 
and diction of the Sangam Age. The whole poem of ioo pieces, 
each purporting to depict a particular mood of love ( ahatturai ), 
is a curious instance of extreme pedantry. The Kalingattup- 
parani of the poet-laureate of the Chola court, Jayangondar, dates 
from the end of the reign of Kulottunga I and is the earliest and 
best of the Paranis now accessible. It is a splendid little master- 
piece which keeps clear the line between history and fictitious 
convention; its choice diction and the sustained harmony between 
the metres employed and the incidents portrayed are unique. 
The Parani is the war poem par excellence and depicts not only the 
pomp and circumstance of war, but all the gruesome details of the 
field. The Kalinga war of Kulottunga, the theme of this poem, 
was celebrated in several other works, none of which could survive 
in the face of Jayangondar’s poem. Another poet-laureate of the 
Chola court was Kuttan or Ottakkuttan who graced the reigns of 
three successors of Kulottunga (viz. Vikrama Chola, Kulottunga II 
and Rajaraja II) and sang eloquent Ulas of each of them. Bom 
of a poor Sengundar (weaver) family in Malari, a village in the 
Chola country, Kuttan sought service under Sankaran, the chief- 
tain of Puduvai and father of Sadaiyan, the patron of the more 
celebrated Kamban. Kuttan had other patrons like Ganggya, 
whom he praised in a Nalayirakkowai , and a certain Soman of 
Tribhuvani. When his fame rose he was invited to the imperial 
court and entertained there as Kaviccakravarti (‘Emperor of 
Poets’) by the three successive monarchs named. Besides the 
three Ulas, he composed a Parani, no longer extant, on the Kalinga 
war of Vikrama Chola, and a pillaittamil (a poem describing the 




the somewhat rigid canons of Tamil poetics as when he enters on 
an elaborate analysis of the emotions of Rama and Sita after a 
chance meeting which takes place immediately after Rama’s 
entry into Mithila. Elsewhere, as in the description of SIta’s 
behaviour on receiving Rama’s ring from Hanuman, Kamban 




afterwards Kulottunga II. Little is known of the author, and the 
poem has no conspicuous merit except that it has a great Chola 
monarch for its hero and contains passing allusions to some of his 
achievements in war. 

The impulse to produce devotional religious literature which 
was so active in the last period (500-850) continued with some 
force far into this (850-1200), and the extant arrangement of the 
Saiva canon into eleven books was the work of Nambi Andar 
Nambi who lived at the close of the tenth and the beginning 
of the eleventh century. His part in the collection and editing 
of the canon became the subject of UmapatUivacarya’s poem 
Tirumurai-kanda-puranam (fourteenth century). Nambi’s own 
works include six Prabandhas on Nanasambandar and one on 
Appar, besides Tiruttondar-tiruvandddi which gives brief accounts 
of the lives of the sixty-three saints and is based on Sundaramur- 
ti’s Tiruttondattogai. All these and the poems he wrote in praise of 
Vinayaka and Chidambaram, find a place in the eleventh book of 
the canon. The same book includes five compositions of Patti- 
nattu-pillaiyar in which this senior contemporary of Nambi 
celebrates the Saiva shrines of Chidambaram, Kalumalam(Shiyali), 
Tiruvidaimarudur, Kanchipuram and Orriyur. Earlier than 
Nambi but not far removed from him were the authors represented 
in the ninth book of the canon, Tiruviiaippd. There are nine of 
t hem including Gandaraditya, the son of Parantaka I, and a 



ance with another divine command, he listened attentively to 
Sekkilar’s exposition of the work from day to day for a whole year. 
It was hailed universally as a veritable fifth Veda in Tamil and 
immediately took its place as the twelfth and last book in the 
Saiva canon. It has influenced profoundly the lives of all the Saivas 
of the Tamil country and of those in Andhra and Karnataka 
through translations and adaptations. It is one of the master- 
pieces of Tamil literature, and worthily commemorates the great 
age of the Imperial Cholas and their sustained devotion to Saivism. 

Vaishnava religious literature during this period was mostly 
composed in Sanskrit. It is possible that the last two alvars 
lived far into this period, but the acaryas who succeeded them, 
Nathamuni, the redactor of the 4,000 hymns, his grandson 



LITERATURE 363 

Alavandar or Yamunacarya and the great Ramanuja himself wrote 
almost all their works in Sanskrit, a rather strange transformation 
for a movement which began with a more popular appeal than 
Saivism. Even the commentators on the early Tamil hymns like 
Pijlan, the author of the shortest extant commentary on Tiru- 
vdymoli , Nanjiyar, Nambijlai, Periyavaccan andVadakkuttiruvidip- 
pillai, all authors of more elaborate commentaries, developed a 
quaint style, tnanipravala (lit. crystal and coral), loaded with 
Sanskrit words not easily understood outside the narrow learned 
circle. The centum of verses in praise of Ramanuja, the Ramdnuja- 
nurrandadi, by his disciple Tiruvarangattu Amudanar is a con- 
spicuous exception; it is a poem in simple devotional style held 
in great esteem to this day and often repeated as a daily prayer; 
the central idea of the poem is that there is no way to salvation 
without the grace of the guru. 

Jivasambodanai of Devendra-munivaris a Jaina work expound- 
ing in detail twelve modes of meditation in the form of an address 
to the soul. The work is replete with mythical stories and anec- 
dotes, and its metres resemble those employed in contemporary 
Tamil inscriptions. 

In the field of Tamil grammar, the Ydpparungalam and 
Y apparungalakkarigai, two authoritative works on prosody, 
were composed by Amitasagara, a Jaina ascetic of the close of the 
tenth century. Both the works have lucid commentaries, that on 
the Karigai being by a certain Gunasagara, also a Jaina ascetic and 
most probably a pupil of Amitasagara. The Ydpparungalam 
is unique in its range and offers an exhaustive treatment of the 
metres in Tamil, and the Karigai (Skt. Karihd) is its abridgement. 
Amitasagara quotes the Sulamani and is himself quoted by Buddha- 
mitra, the Buddhist author of Viraioliyam. Both Amitasagara 
and Buddhamitra were patronized by the contemporary Chola 
monarchs and granted liberal assignments of territory. The 
latter mentions king Vlrarajendra as a great Tamil scholar. His 
work written in Kalitturai metre attempts a synthesis between 
the Tamil and Sanskrit systems of grammar, and comprises all 
the five sections of a complete treatise — sandhi ( eluttu ), sol, 
porul, yappu and alankara ( ani ). The work is full of interest for 
a student of the history of grammatical theory in Tamil; it has a 
commentary by Perundevanar, a pupil of the author. The 
Dandiyalangaram treats mainly of figures of speech and, as its 





LITERATURE 


365 


The fourth and last great period of Tamil literature that will 
engage our attention extended from 1200 to 1650 and was marked 
by a large output of philosophical works, commentaries, Puranas 
and Prabandhas. Much of this literature is derivative and second- 
rate, and one gets the impression that the age of creative achieve- 
ment has given place to imitation and criticism. A somewhat 
arid scholasticism found much encouragement in the numerous 
mathas that begin to play a prominent part in the educational 
system of the country. The numerous authors of the period 
belonged mostly to the Saiva or Vaishnava sects, though some 
Jaina writers continued to write also. Though the emperors of 
Vijayanagar and most of their feudatories even as far south as 
Madura were Telugus with a decided preference for Sanskrit 
and Telugu, there is no reason to think that there was any set- 
back in Tamil literary work, and the Pandyas, confined to the 
extreme south from the fifteenth century, bestowed particular 
attention to the cultivation of Tamil. 

Early in this period, in the first half of the thirteenth century, 
came Meykandar who formulated the tenets of Saiva-siddhanta 
in his Siva-fiana-Bodam, a short treatise of a dozen Sutras, 
perhaps translated from a Sanskrit original. The author has 
added varttikas which explain and illustrate the argument of 
each of the Sutras. The scheme of the work is simple: the first 
three Sutras affirm the existence of the three entities — God ( pati ), 
Bondage ( pasa ), and Soul (pasu)\ the three next define and explain 
their nature and interrelation; the next triad deals with the means 
of release, and the last with its nature. ‘The Veda,’ it has been 
said, ‘is the cow; its milk is the true agama-, the Tamil sung by 
the four in Devaram and Tiruvasagam is the ghee extracted from 
it; and the virtue of the Tamil work of Meykandar of the cele- 
brated (city of) Vennai is the fine taste of the ghee.’ After the 
Bodam, the next work of importance on Saiva doctrine is the 
Siva-kana-Sittiyar of Arunandi, reputed to have been first the 
guru of Meykandar’s father and then the disciple of Meykandar 
himself. Written altogether in verse, this work is a statement of 
the true doctrine (supakkam) in viruttam verses, following the 
order of the Sutras in the Bodam-, this statement is preceded by a 
critical discussion of rival systems (para-pakkam) of which no' 
fewer than fourteen, including four schools of Buddhism and two 
of Jainism, are passed under review. This is the great classic of 



366 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Tamil Saiva doctrine; often commented on, it has been the most 
widely read manual on the subject. The Irupav-irupahdu by the 
same writer owes its name to the alternate use of two metres in 
its twenty verses in the form of a dialogue between teacher and 
pupil. The name of the author’s guru, Meykandar, occurs in each 
of these twenty verses. The Unmai-vilakkam (‘Explanation of the 
Truth’) of Manavasagan-gadandar of Tiruvadi (South Arcot) 
is the simplest of the manuals on the doctrine; true to the essence 
oftheAgamas. Umapatisivacarya (end of the thirteenth and early 
fourteenth century) was the author of the remaining eight works 
which complete the tale of the fourteen Saiva-siddhanta-sastras. 1 
One of them Sankarpa-nirakaranam is dated 1313. Like the 
para-pakkam of the Sittiyar, it is a critique of other creeds; but 
unlike the earlier work, it is much exercised with the minute differ- 
ences within the fold of Saivism. Both these works were comment- 
ed on in the sixteenth century by Nanaprakasar of Tiruvorriyur 
who also composed a Purana on his birthplace (c. 1580). 

At the end of the fourteenth and beginning of the fifteenth 
century came Svarupananda Desikar and his pupil Tattuvarayar, 
authors of two celebrated anthologies bearing on the philosophy 
of Advaita. The Sivaprakasap-perundirattu comprising 2,824 verses 
is the work of the teacher; that of the pupil, called Kurundirattu, 
(short anthology), includes almost exactly half as many verses as 
the bigger work. The two anthologies together conserve much 
of the religious and philosophical literature of the silver age of 
Saivism in the Tamil country that would otherwise have been lost. 
Tattuvarayar was an ascetic, like his guru, and author of many 
devotional poems and songs, some of which were remarkable for 
the simplicity of their diction and their wide appeal to the 
common man; the songs in particular were of the nature of 
ditties and created many new models that were extensively 
followed by subsequent composers. Among the poems may 
be named Paduturai, Naruimnodan Kalambakam, Mohavadaip- 
parani and A iinavadaip -parani. Even wider in its appeal was the 
Tiruppugal of Arunagirinatha, over 1,360 songs in various metres 
handled with the utmost skill and characterized by a unique lilt. 
The diction is highly Sanskritized and the imagery vivid; the 
author’s wide knowledge of the sacred lore of Hinduism is 

1 Some Mss. include Tugafarubodam of SirxambalanadigaJ of Shiyali 
(fourteenth century) in the place of Unmmnmoilakkam ascribed to Umapati. 


LITERATURE 367 

evident in every song. His mention of Praudhadeva Raya 
places him the fifteenth century. His life has become the 
subject of many legends, but the references in the songs 
show that for a time he led the life of a libertine which 
he afterwards regretted. He accepted Muruga or Karttikeya 
as the supreme deity, and in philosophy he followed the Saiva- 
siddhanta system. He seems to have visited all the shrines of 
Muruga and been particularly attached to Palani which figures 
largely in the Tiruppugal. A number of shorter devotional 
poems, all in praise of Muruga also are attributed to him. A 
certain Sivaprakasar of Madura (1489) wrote valuable commenta- 
ries on Irupav-irupahdu of Arunandi, and Sivaprakasam of 
Umapati. Haridasa was a Vaishnava poet who adorned the court 
of the celebrated Krishnadeva Raya of Vijayanagar, and wrote the 
Irusamaya-vilakkam, an exposition of the two systems, viz. 
Saivism and Vaishnavism, with a bias towards the latter. The 
Sivadarumottaram (1553) of Marainanasambandar, who lived in 
a matha in Chidambaram, contains over 1,200 verses in twelve 
sections based on the Agamas and dealing with cosmology', with the 
temple and its constitution, and with theology. The same author 
wrote also the Saiva-samaya-neri (‘the path of the Saiva creed’) 
727 small stanzas ( kural venbas) on the daily religious observances 
of Saivas. About the same time (1564) Sivagrayogi alias Sivak- 
kolundu Desikar composed an authoritative commentary on the 
whole of the Sittiyar, besides other works on ritualism, asceticism 
and other religious subjects. Another famous writer who flourish- 
ed at the same time was Kamalai ftanaprakasar, the author of many 
manuals of Saiva worship, besides the Purana on Tirumajuvadi, 
and a kovai on Tiruvannamalai. Masilamani Sambandar’s 
Puranam on UttarakoSamangai is very important for the life-story 
of Manikkava^agar. Niramba Alagiya DeSikar wrote Setu- 
puranam which is popular among scholars as it uses all the rare 
words listed in the lexicons and is considered helpful inenriching 
the vocabulary of aspiring writers. He wrote also Puranas on 
Tirupparangiri and Tiruvaiyaru, and a commentary on the 
Sittiyar , differing in some ways from his elder contemporary 
Sivagrayogi. He had many pupils who composed several 
minor Puranas and religious works including the well-known 
Tiruvalur-puranatn (1592). TuraSai Ambalavana-Desikar (c. 1605) 
was the author of many religious works like the Sittdnta-sikamani, 



work also bears the name of its model and has an alternative name 
Meynnana-vilakkam (exposition of true knowledge), 48 cantos 
comprising i.oiQ verses. Being a high official, Tiruvengada 
patronized many poets. One of the latest works of Saiva philoso- 
phy was Ranabharana-vilakkam, a commentary on Siva-Nana- 
Sittiyar by Velliy ambla Tambiran (c. 1650), a disciple of the famous 
Kumaraguruparar. It is an extensive Bhashya replete with citations 
from Agamas of which the author also translated some into Tamil. 

The philosophical and religious literature of Vaishnavism 
during this period as in the last comprises mostly Sanskrit works. 
There was very little writing in Tamil other than commentaries 
and sub-commentaries on the canonical hymns and a class of 
esoteric theological works called Rahasyas (secrets), of which it is 
not easy to gather an authentic account. The commentaries 
adopted the manipravala style. Pillai Lokacarya, author of 
eighteen Rahasya works, and his pupil and younger brother Alagiya 
Manavalaperumal N ayanar, author of more Rahasyas and commen- 
taries on parts of the canon, came very early in the period and 
belonged to the first decades of the thirteenth century. Vedanta 


LITERATURE 


His son and pupil Nayinar Acariyar wrote a poem in praise of his 
father and guru in twenty verses known as Pillaiyandadi , and other 
works of theology and polemics; both father and son were keen 
controversialists and travelled incessantly to hold religious dis- 
putations. TiruvaymoH Pijlai (1307) wrote commentaries on 
the hymns of Periyalvar and on Sri-vacanabhiishana , one of Pijlai 
Lokacarya’s eighteen Rahasyas; Manavala Mahamuni (1370), 
pupil of Tiruvaymoli Pijlai, wrote commentaries on many canon- 
ical works and on the Ramanuja-nurrandadi\ he is held in the 
highest esteem by one section of the Vaishnavas, the Tengalais 
{southern branch). 

A considerable part of the religious and philosophical literature 
of the age took the form of Puranas, some of which have been 
named already. Other prominent works in the same class may 
now be noticed. The Kdyirpuranam of Umapati Sivacarya is 
among the earliest of the Sthalapuranas and narrates the legends of 
the celebrated Saiva shrine in Chidambaram ; it follows the Kavya 
style and ranks fairly high as literature. There is also a Cidam- 
bara-puranam (1508) by Purana Tirumalainathan, who also wrote 
the Cokkanathar-ula in praise of the deity of Madura. More 
popular in its diction and content is the Ariccandira-puranam 
(1524) of Nallur Virakavirayar which sets forth the trials which 
Hariiicandra had to endure on account of his devotion to truth. 
The work comprises twelve sections and 1,225 eas y flowing 
verses; the poet is said to have been a goldsmith of Nallur in 
Ramnad district. We may next mention three large works on the 
sixty-four sacred sports of Siva at Madura. The Sundara- 
pandiyam of Anadariwas composed at the request of Tiruvirundan, 
a general of Vlrappa Nayaka (1572-95) of Madura; the poem is a 
translation and bears name of its Sanskrit original; only a fragment 
of over 2,000 verses has survived. Two other peoms, both called 
Tiruvilaiyadal, also handle the same theme with many variations ; 
the shorter one was by Perumbarrappuliyur-nambi who has been 
assigned on rather slender grounds to the thirteenth century, 
but might have lived much later; the larger version (purporting to 
give the names of the Pandya kings in whose reigns each of the 
sports took place) was by Paranjoti of Vedaranyam perhaps 
written at the beginning of the seventeenth century. The 
Kandapuranam of Kacciyappa Sivacarya (1625) closely follows 
Kamban’s poetry as a model and is based on a section of the 







LITERATURE 


371 


An Ula on another famous Saiva shrine, that of Tiruvanaikka 
on the island of Srirangam, was the work of Kalamegham, the 
accredited author of many witty verses besides ; he was supported 
by Saluva Tirumalairaja, the son of Goppaya, and ruler of the 
Chola country under Vijayanagar in the middle of the fifteenth 
century. Saiva Ellappa Navalar, a vellala poet of the Tanjore 
district, flourished in the sixteenth century (c. 1542-80), and 
wrote an excellent kdvai on Tiruvarur (496 verses), besides 
Arunaiandadi and Arunacalapuranam , both on the shrine of Tiru- 
vannamalai, and Tiruvirinjaipuranam ; he also wrote a commentary 
on the Tamil Soundaryalahari , a translation by Vlrai Kavirajapan- 
ditar. 

About the same time the Pandyan king Ativlrarama of Tenkasi 
(c. 1564) achieved literary distinction by his Naidadam with its 
twelve padalams and 1,172 verses written in high style and full 
of conceits not always pleasing to a modern reader, but held in 
high esteem by pandits; it contains many echoes of phrases and 
sentiments from older classics like the Jivakacintamani and the 
Rdmayanam of Kamban. Easier in their style are the same royal 
poet’s translations from Sanskrit originals — the Kasikandam and 
Kurmapuranam ; and the small book on morals known as Verriver- 
kai or Narundogai is simple enough to be followed by children, for 
whom it is meant. A contemporary of this royal author was Serai 
Kavirajapiflai who wrote Tirukkalatti-nadar-kattalaikkalitturai- 
malaion the deity of Kalahasti atthe request of the king ; other works 
of Kavirajapiflai were Tirukkalatti-nadar-ula, Tiruv-annamaliyar- 
vannam, Seyur-Murugan-ula and Rattinagiri-ula. All the poems 
are marked by elegant diction and deep religious feeling. Vara- 
' tungarama Pandya, a cousin of Ativlrarama, was also a litterateur 
with varied interests; his three andadis on the Siva shrine at Karu- 
vai, i.e. Karivalam-vandanallur in Tinnevelly district, take high 
rank as pure literature; one of them employs ten metres and is 
called Padirruppattandadi; and the others are known from their 
metres as Venbavandadi and Kalitturai-andadi. His Pirambttira- 
kandam is a theological poem in twelve adhydyas of 1,310 verses on 
religious subjects. He also translated into Tamil the work on 
erotics known a Kokkoha after the name of the composer of the 
Sanskrit original. In the first half of the seventeenth century, 
Kandasami Pulavar (1621) of Tiruppuvanam wrote an Ula on 
the local Saiva shrine and a purana on Tiruvappanur. More 



Northern India conducting disputations with rival sectarians 
including Muslims. He is said to have performed miracles, met 
the Mughal emperor and received from him a gift of land in 
Benares for the erection of a temple and a matha. Bom a mute, 
he gained the power of speech in his sixth year by the grace of the 
deity of Tiruccendur and celebrated him in his first poem Kandar- 
kali-venba. His other literary productions included Kayilaik- 
kalambakam on the deity (Siva) of his birthplace which was also 
called Kailasam ; apillaittamil, and irattaimani-malai on the goddess 
Mlnakshi of Madura. Maduraikkalambakam , a work of 102 
stanzas celebrating Chokkalinga (Siva), the deity of Madura, and 
his sports; Tiruvarur-nanmani-malai , forty verses in four metres 
on Tyagaraja (Siva) of Tiruvarur; a pillaittamil on Muttukumara- 
svami (Muruga) of Vaidisvarankovil, Kasikkalambakam and other 
devotional works. His Sakalakald-valli-mdlai , a praise of Sara- 



LITERATURE 373 

with Annamalai Reddi both on his way to Tinnevelly and back; 
patron and protege were alike Vlra-saivas by persuasion, but the 
poet at any rate was no fanatic as among his thirty works there 
are many that show his deep knowledge of and regard for the phi- 
losophy of Saiva-siddhanta and for the four Samayacaryas of Tamil 
Saivism and their works. He is said to have met a Christian mission- 
ary for a disputation, (this could not have been Father Beschi as 
is often stated), and to have composed a polemic refuting the 
Christian creed — Esumada-nirakaranam, no longer extant. Besides 
devotional poems on the deities of Tiruccendur, Tiruvengai (near 
Turaimangalam), Tiruvannamalai and other places, he wrote the 
PrabhuUnga-lilai, a translation from a Kannada original on the 
sports of Allamadeva, an incarnation of Siva honoured of the Vlra- 
saivas; it is a long poem in 25 sections containing 1,157 stanzas. 
It bears the date 1652. Other notable works of the author are: 
Siddhantasikhamani, a Vira-Saiva manual, translated from Sanskrit; 
Vedanta-cudamani, a translation of a Kannada version of a portion 
of Vivekaciiddmani, of Sankaracarya ; Tarukkaparipadai, a trans- 
lation of the Sanskrit manual Tarkaparibhashd; and Nanneri, 
a short work on ethics in forty venbas. Sivaprakasar remained a 
bachelor to his death at the early age of thirty-two. 

To the first half of the fifteenth century has been assigned 
an important anthology, Purattirattu, which followed the Kural in 
the selection and arrangement of topics and sections, and brought 
together perhaps 2,000 verses and more from all works in the 
language to the dateofthe anthology;noworklater titan Kamban’s 
seems to have found a place in it. Its last part on Love has not 
been recovered except in an abstract of 65 poems. Many poems 
no longer accessible were known to the anonymous compiler 
of the anthology. 

Among works of grammar composed in this period, after 
Nambi Ahapporul, already mentioned, we have the Cidambarap- 
pattiyal by Paranjoti, the son of Tirumalai-nathan ( 1 5°8) of the 
Chidambarapuranam ; the pdttiyal explains the conventions 
governing the composition of different types of Prabandhas. 
Another work on the same subject was the Navanitappattiyal 
of Navanita-natan which has evoked a very valuable commentary. 
Next may be placed a fragmentary and anonymous work based on 
the Kalaviyal or Ahapporul of Iraiyanar, and named Kalaviyar- 
karigai for that reason by the editor of this precious fragment. 








LITERATURE 


375 

commentaries on the Sangam anthologies of Purananuru, Padir- 
ruppattu and Aingurunuru must also have been written sometime 
in this period. So also the commentary on Purapporulvenbamalai 
by Chamundi-devanayakan. Tirumenikkavirayar, born in Tenti- 
rupperai in Tinnevelly district, was a contemporary of Tirumalai 
Nayaka; he wrote a commentary of Maran-Alankaram, and a 
prose abstract of the Kural known as Tirukkural-nun-porulmalai; 
a similar work based on Tolkappiyam attributed to him is not now 
available. The importance of the commentaries is twofold: 
they are almost the only considerable prose works in Tamil ; and 
they mention many authors, works and historical and social facts 
that we have no other means of knowing. 

In lexicography, the most popular lexicon Nigandu-cudamani 
was composed by a Jaina author by name Mandalapurusha, most 
probably in the reign of Krishnadeva Raya of Vijayanagar whose 
name figures prominently in the lexicon. The work follows the 
scheme of Divakaram, but is written in verse instead of in the 
form of Sutras. Then came the Agaradi-nigandu (1594) of Chi- 
dambara Revana Siddar, a Vira-saiva, the first to attempt an alpha- 
betical arrangement of the words treated; the first word ( agaradi ) 
in the name of the work meaning ‘alphabetic order’ has since come 
to mean a dictionary. The Kayadaram (c. 1550) of a Brahmin 
author, Kayadarar by name, cited in Maran-Alankaram , and the 
Uriccol-nigandu, a short lexicon by a certain Saiva author named 
Gangeyan (early seventeenth century), are also worth noting. 

Tamilakara-munivan of Tinnevelly set forth portions of reli- 
gious law from Sanskrit in two Tamil works called Prayacdtta- 
samuccayam (1633) and Asaucadipikar, their names show that they 
dealt respectively with penances for sin and pollution due to death. 
He also wrote other works like Nitisaram and Nellaitiruppani- 
malai. Much more interesting is the anonymous ballad 
Ramappayyan-ammanai, giving an account of the wars of a 
general of Tirumalai Nayaka, which belongs to a class of works 
of which few specimens have survived. 

Kannada 

Among South Indian languages, after Tamil, Kannada possesses 
the oldest literature. Its beginnings are not clearly traceable, 
but a considerable volume of prose and poetry must have come into 
existence before the date of Nripatunga’s Kavirajamarga (850), 



who came of a family from Vengi and flourished in the court of 
a feudatory of Rashtrakuta Krishna III, Arikesari II ofVemulavada. 
Pampa is said to have composed two great poems at the relatively 
early age of thirty-nine (941). His Adipurana narrates the life- 
story of the first Jaina Tirthankara; the other work, Vikramarjuna 
Vijaya, contains the author’s own version of a section of the 
Mahabharata story, and is called Pampa-Bharata on that account; 
the poet makes Arjuna the hero of the poem and identifies him with 
his patron Arikesari and introduces into the narrative many 
interesting details of contemporary history. Critics have un- 
animously hailed Pampa as the most eminent among Kannada 
poets. Pampa’s junior contemporary was Ponna whose principal 
work is the Santipurana, the legendary history of the sixteenth 
Tirthankara. He wrote also the Jinaksharamale, ‘an acrostic poem 
in praise of the Jinas’. His family also had its origin in 
Vengi. He got the title Ubhayakavicakravarti, ‘supreme poet in 
two languages (Sanskrit and Kannada)’ from Krishna III. 

Raima, who, with Pampa and Ponna, completes ‘the Three 
Gems’ who usher in Kannada literature in full panoply, adorned 
the court of the Chalukya king Tailapa II and his successor. 
Bom in 949 of a family of bangle-sellers in Muduvolal, Raima 



LITERATURE 377 

rose to the rank of Kavicakravarti (poet-laureate) in the Chalukya 
court and enjoyed the honours of the golden rod, chaitri, elephant 
and umbrella. His Ajilapurana (993) is a Campu in twelve 
asvasas on the life of the second Tlrthankara. 1 he poem was 
written at the request of Attimabbe, the pious wife of general 
Nagavarma, who survived her husband for some years and pro- 
moted the cause of Jainism in many ways. The Sdhasabhlmavijaya 
or Gadayuddha (982) is also a Campu of ten dhasas which reviews 
the story of the Mahabharata with particular reference to the last 
fight with clubs (gada) between Bhima and Duryodhana, as well 
as the wars and achievements of Irivabedanga Satyasraya on whom 
the poet confers the title Sahasa-bhima (‘daring Bhima’). Two 
other works of Ranna — Parasurama-carita and Cakresvara-carita 
are no longer extant; and a lexicon Ranna Kanda in which the 
verses generally end with kaviratna may well be his production 
also. 

Chavundaraya, one of Ranna’s early patrons, was a feudatory of 
Ganga Racamalla IV who conferred on him the title Raya for his 
having set up the colossus of Gommatesvara at Sravana Belgola. 
He composed in 978 the Cavundaraya-piirdna or Trishashti- 
lakshanamahapurdna, the earliest extant prose work in Kannada, 
treating of the legends of twenty-four Tirthankaras, twelve 
Cakravartis, nine Balabhadras, nine Narayanas and nine Prati- 
narayanas, sixty-three in all. Nagavarma I was another protege 
of Chavundaraya, and like him, a pupil of Ajitasena. He came of a 
Brahmin family which like Pampa’s came from the Vengi country. 
His Chandombudhi, ‘ocean of prosody’, addressed by the author 
to his wife, is the earliest work on the subject in Kannada. The 
Karnataka-Kadambari is a Campu based on Bana’s prose romance 
in Sanskrit; its sweet and flowing style is valued highly by critics. 

The next writer of note was Durgasimha, a Brahmin Saiva 
minister under Jayasimha II Jagadekamalla; his Pancatantra 
is a Campu professedly based on Gunadhya’s Brihatkatha; it is a 
learned work perhaps too full of sound jingles (prasa ) to suit 
modem taste. Durgasimha mentions many of his predecessors 
and contemporaries. Among the latter was Chandraraja, a Brahmin 
polyhistor of the Vajigotra, whose Madanatilaka, a Campu in 
eighteen adhikaranas, is a work on erotics in the form of a dialogue 
between his patron and his wife; the author claims that he has 
used the most modem language of his time ( posa-kannada ). 



378 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Sridharacarya, a Jaina Brahmin, showed his capacity for scientific 
writing (sdslrakavitva) in his Jataka-tilaka (1049), the earliest work 
on astrology in Kannada, and his capacity in belles lettres (kavya 
kavitva) in his Candraprabhacarite, no longer extant. The Jain 
Nagavarmacarya, patronized by Ganga Udayaditya (1070), a 
feudatory of Somesvara II at Banavase, was the author of Candra- 
cudamani-iataka, a centum of easy verses in mattebha metre on the 
ethics of renunciation. 

The next great writer was Nagachandra (c. 1105) a Jain and a 
man of means who built the Mallinatha Jinalaya dedicated to the 
nineteenth TIrthankara at Bijapur and also wrote the Malhndtha- 
purana , a Carnpu. But Nagachandra is best known for his Rama- 
candra-caritapurana which gives the Jaina version of the Rama 
legend in a Campu of sixteen sections, the story proper beginning 
only with the third. The poem was a necessary complement to 
the Bharata of Pampa, and earned for its author the title Abhinava 
(new) Pampa. The story differs in many ways from Valmlki’s; 
Rama gets the Jinadlksha , becomes a Jaina ascetic and attains 
Nirvana at the end. To the first quarter of the twelfth century 
belong also a Jaina polemic Samayaparikshe of Brahmaiiva 
which seeks to establish the superiority of Jainism over all other 
creeds, and the Govaidya of Klrttivarma, a work on veterinary 
science, half-medicine and half-magic. Round about 1145, 
Karnaparya wrote the life of the twenty-second Tirthankara 
in his Neminathapurana, a Campu in fourteen ah’dsas in which the 
story of Krishna and the Mahabharata are also cleverly worked 
in. To the same time belongs Nagavarma II, the author of 
Kavydvalokana , an important work on the grammar and rhetoric 
of Kannada in five sections; it takes the form of Sutras in verse 
illustrated by examples from literature. Another work of Naga- 
varma on grammar is the Karndtakabhdshabhushana ; here the 
Sutras and a short explanation are both in Sanskrit, while the illu- 
strations come from Kannada literature. The Vastukosa, a 
third work of Nagavarma II, is a relatively short lexicon of 800 
granthas, giving Kannada equivalents of Sanskrit terms. Naga- 
varma was the teacher of Jagadekamalla II whom he survived for 
many years, becoming the teacher of poet Janna (c. 1209). Udaya- 
dityalankara (c. 1150) is a short work on the art of poetry based on 
Dandin’s KavyadarSa by a Chola prince whose name it bears. A 
work on medicine, Pujyapada’s Kalyanakaraka , was translated 






LITERATURE 


from Sanskrit into Kannada at this time by a Jaina author Jagaddala 
Somanatha; 'the treatment it prescribes is entirely vegetarian 
and non-alcoholic.’ Rajaditya (1190). a Jain of Puvinabage, 
showed great skill in reducing to easy verse the mathematical 
subjects he dealt with in several ganita works like Vyavahara- 
ganita, Kshetra-ganita and Lilavati. 

Most of the writers so far mentioned were Jains, and it may 
be well to continue and complete the account of Jaina authors 
before turning to those of the two other classes, VIra-saivas and 
Vaishnavas, who began to influence Kannada literature from the 
twelfth and fifteenth centuries respectively. 

Jaina writers continued to flourish under the later Hoysalas, 
and the lives of the Tlrthankaras formed the theme of many 
Puranas in the form of Campus. Nemichandra, court-poet under 
Vira B allala, wrote the Lilavati, a plain romance with Banavase 
as its scene of action, where a prince and princess dream of each 
other, meet after delays, and are wedded to live happily for ever. 
Nemichandra undertook to write the Neminathapurana, at the in- 
stance of Ballala’s minister, but died before completing it, and the 
work came to be known as Ardha Nemi, ‘unfinished (life of) 
Nemi’. Janna was not only a poet but a minister and a builder 
of temples; he wrote the Yaiodharacarite (1209), the story of a 
king who was about to sacrifice two boys to Mariamma, but on 
hearing their story gave up the idea, released them and abandoned 
the practice of sacrificing live victims. The Anantanalhapurdna 
(1230) on the life of the fourteenth Tlrthankara was also his work; 
his style is noted for its dignity and grace. Bandhuvarma, a 
vaiiya, wrote the Harivamsabhyudaya and Jiva Sambodhana. 
The latter is a work on morals and renunciation in the form of an 
address to the soul. A new form of composition, sangatya, 
meant to be sung to the accompaniment of a musical instrument, 
was introduced by Sisumayana (c. 1232) who wrote two works in 
this style — Anjana-carita and Tripura-dahana ; the latter is an 
allegorical poem on the destruction of the triple fortress of Birth, 
Decay and Death. Andayya’s Madana Vijaya (Triumph of 
Cupid) composed about 1235 is remarkable for its total avoidance 
of assimilated Sanskrit words ( tatsamas ), limiting itself to indige- 
nous ( desya ) and naturalised Sanskrit ( tadbhava ) words ; the expe- 
riment was not continued by later authors. The story of the 
poem is that Siva imprisoned the moon, and Cupid, in his anger, 



380 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

assailed Siva with his arrows and was cursed by him to be separated 
from his bride; he contrived, however, to free himself of the curse 
and rejoin his bride. The work is known by other names— 
Karima Gella (‘Victory of Kama’), Kabbigara Kava (‘Poets’ 
Defender’), and Sobagina Suggi (‘Harvest of Beauty’). A brother- 
in-law of Janna was Mallikarjuna (c. 1245), an ascetic who com- 
piled an anthology Siikti-sudhdrnava, which arranges extracts 
from many works under eighteen topical headings of which only 
fifteen have yet been found. Kesiraja (c. 1260), the son of Malli- 
karjuna, was the author of Sabdamanidarpana (‘Mirror of Word- 
jewels’), the standard grammar of Kannada. The rules are set 
forth in kanda metre and followed by a prose comment by the 
author himself; like other works of its class it refers to the usage 
of writers of repute and is of high scientific and historical value to 
the student of the language. Kumudendu (c. 1275) wrote a 
Ramayana according to Jaina tradition in shatpadi metre ; the work 
was largely influenced by the Pampa Ramayana already noticed. 
Other works of note produced under the Hoysalas were: Ratta- 
Mala or RattasG.tr a (c. 1300) of Ratta-kavi, treating of ‘natural 
phenomena such as rain, earthquakes, lightning, planets and 
omens’; Punyasvara ( c . 1331) of Nagaraja, a Campu containing 
fifty-two tales of Puranic heroes said to be translated from Sanskrit 
for the guidance of house-holders; and a work on toxicology, 
Khagendra-mani-darpana (c. 1360), by Mangaraja I. 

In the Age of Vijayanagar (1336-1650) the Jains were being 
steadily pushed out by the rising influence of Saivas of different 
schools and Vaishnavas; yet they continued to write in Kannada 
on the lives of Tirthankaras and other holy persons. Madhura 
(1385), patronized by ministers of Harihara II and Devaraja I, 
wrote Dharmandthapurana on the fifteenth Tlrthankara and a short 
poem in praise of Gommatesvara of Sravana Belgola; his style 
resembled that of the earlier Jaina poets. There was also Vritta 
Vilasa, author of Dharmaparikshe, a Kannada version of a Sanskrit 
original of the same name by Amitagati, and Sastrasdra, both 
works of quasi-religious import. The life of Jivandhararaja 
was a favourite subject and was handled three times over in 
shatpadi metre by Bhaskara of Penugonda (1424), Bommarasa of 
Terkanambi (c. 1485) and KoteSvara of Tuluvadeia (c. 1500). 
Bahubali of Sringeri (c. 1560) narrated the story of Naga-Kumara 
who despised riches and took to a religious life. 



wrote a number of works ; his Trilokasara ( 1 557) is an account of 
Jaina cosmogony; the Aparajita-sataka treats of philosophy, 
morals and renunciation; the Bharatesvara-carita gives the story 
of the legendary emperor Bharata, the son of the first Tirthankara 
who turned Jaina ascetic. Many songs by this author are still 
current among Jains and are known as Annagalapada, ‘songs 
of the brothers’. Nemanna’s Jnana-bhaskara-carite (1559) exalts 
meditation and study as means of emancipation above rites and 
austerities. 

Lastly may be mentioned a poet of uncertain date assigned by 
some to c. 1400, Ayata-varma whose Ratna-karandaka, a Campu 
translated from Sanskrit, treats of ‘the beliefs and duties of the 
Jains under the heads of the three Jaina “jewels” — right belief, 
right knowledge, and right conduct’. 

After the Jains, the VIra-saivas did most for the development 
of Kannada language and literature; they wrote many religious 
works in Kannada and showed a decided preference for the prose 
medium. Basava and his contemporaries (twelfth century) 
brought into existence the Vacana literature in simple prose easily 
understood of the common folk and well calculated to popularize 
the new creed. There were over two hundred writers, many 
women among them, with Mahadeviyakka at their head. E. P. 
Rice characterizes their work thus: ‘In form the Vacanas are 
brief disconnected paragraphs, each ending with one or another 
of the numerous local names under which Siva is worshipped. In 
style they are epigrammatical, parallelistic and allusive. They 



38 2 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

dwell on the vanity of riches, the valuelessness of mere rites or 
book-learning, the uncertainty of life, and the spiritual privileges 
of the Sivabhakta. They call men to give up the desire for 
worldly wealth and ease, to live lives of sobriety and detachment 
from the world, and to turn to Siva for refuge. They are seldom 
controversial, but almost entirely hortatory, devotional, and ex- 
pository. They are still recited by Lingayat dcaryas for the instruc- 
tion of their followers.’ Some of the Vacanas have a section called 
Kdlajnana, a messianic forecast of the future speaking of the arrival 
of an ideal king, VIra Vasanta Raya, who would rebuild Kalyam 



attributed, and his nephew Chenna Basava, special mention must 
be made of two groups of highly honoured teachers and writers. 
First the ‘three panditas' — Mancanna known as Sivalenka (body- 
guard of Siva), Srlpati Pandita, and Mallikarjuna Panditaradhya ; 
and the ‘five dcaryas’— Revana Siddha or Renukacarya of Kolli- 
paka, Manila Siddha of Kollapura, Panditaradhya just mentioned 
as one of the three panditas, Ekorami Tande, and Visvesvaracarya. 
They were either contemporaries of Basava or lived a little before 
or after him. 

This period forms a definite transition marked by some notable 
changes in Kannada language and literature. The letter la 
tends to disappear giving place to la, and pa in particular positions 
changes into ha. The Campu form of composition goes out of 
use, and new metres distinctive of Kannada like shatpadi and 
tripadi, verses with six and three lines respectively, and ragales, 
lyrical poems with refrains, come into vogue. 

We may now notice the chief Lingayat writers other than the 
authors of Vacanas. The first is HariSvara, who came of a family 
of Karanikas (accountants) of Halebid and was a contemporary 
of Hoysala Narasimha I (1141-73). He spent several years at 
Hampi, and among his works is Pampasataka, a centum of verses 
in praise of Virupaksha of Hampi. His Girija-kalydna is still 
in the old style of Jaina works, a Campu of ten sections on the mar- 
riage of Siva and Parvatl. His Siva ganada-ragalegalu has all the 
characteristics of the new school which starts with him; it treats 
of the lives of the sixty-three saints of early Saivism and other 
devotees. A nephew and disciple of Harisvara was Raghavanka, 



(c. 1385). Though Harisvara, Raghavanka and Padmarasa were 
contemporaries of Basava, none of them makes any reference to 
him. Palkuriki Somanatha ( c . 1195), bom at Palkuriki in the 
Godavari district, was the author of several works on Vira-saivism 
in Telugu and Kannada. Legend credits him with victory in 
many contests with other sectarians, particularly Vaishnavas, and 
final mukti at Kailas. His life became the subject of a Purana by 
Tontadarya (c. 1560). He was a great admirer of Basava and his 
Telugu Basava-purana was used by Bhima Kavi (1369) when he 
wrote a Kannada work of the same name. Somanatha’s chief 
works in Kannada are Silasampadane, Sahasragananama , and 
Pancaratna, besides several ragales and Vacanas. Someivara- 
sataka , a popular work on moral subjects, was perhaps the work 
of a contemporary and namesake of Somanatha from Puligere. 
Two works of romance belonging to this period are the Kusumavali 
of Deva-kavi (c. 1200) which resembles Lilavati of Nemichandra 
in its story, and Sritigararasa of Somaraja (1222), also called 
Udbhatakavya as it has Udbhata, a ruler of Gersoppa, for its 
hero. 

The Lingayat literature of the Vijayanagar period (1336-1650) 
falls under two heads — stories of reformers and devotees, and 
expositions of doctrine. The Basavapuraria of Bhlmakavi, an 
Aradhya-Brahmin, completed in 1369, is an important and a 
very popular work on hagiology. Written in shatpadi metre, it 




LITERATURE 


385 


Vaishnavas led to ‘organized processions through the town in 
honour of the books of their respective faiths’. Out of this rivalry 
also arose the Praudharayacarita of Adrisya (c. 1595), stories of 
Saiva saints narrated by Jakkanarya to Devaraya JI to divert his 
mind from the Brahminical version of the Bharata. 

A famous teacher of the time of Virupaksha (1467-78) was 
Tontada Siddhesvara or Siddalinga-yati, who practised Siva-yoga 
for a long time in a garden and came to be known on that account 
as tontada, of the garden. A matha and a temple mark the place of 
his burial at Yediyur, near Kunigal. He wrote a prose work of 
700 vacanas called Shatsthala-Jiidndmrita, and had many disciples 
who wrote similar works. Virakta Tontadarya (c. 1560) composed 
the Siddhesvara-purana on the life of his teacher. Nijaguna- 
siva-yogi, at first a petty ruler of the territory round Sambhulinga 
hill near Yelandur and afterwards Siva-yogi, was a prolific writer 
who employed tripadi, sangatya, ragaU and prose in his works. 
Notable among them are a commentary on the Sanskrit work 
Siva-yoga-pradipika meant for those who cannot read Sanskrit 
and desire emancipation, and Viveka-cintamani, a cyclopaedia of 
‘Sanskrit terms and Vira-saiva lore’. Mallanarya of Gubbi lived 
in the reign of Krishnadeva Raya (1509-29) and wrote both in 
Kannada and Sanskrit. His chief works in Kannada were: 
Bhdva-cintaratna (1513), said to be based on a Tamil work of 
Nanasambandar; Satyendra-chola-kathe, the story ofaCholaking 
to illustrate the power of the sacred mantra of five letters of the 
Saivas; and Viraiaivamrita (1530) describing twenty-five sports 
of Siva and giving the lives of the saints, old and new. Viruparaja 
(1519), author of a sangatya work on the life of king Cheramanka, 
a puratana, and his son Vlrabhadra-raja who wrote five Satakas 
on Vira-saiva doctrine and morals were other writers of the period. 
Towards the close of it came Sarvajnamurti whose SarvajHa- 
padagalu is in tripadi metre; about a thousand of these padas 
are current and treat of religion, morals and society, in much the 
same manner as the sayings of Vemana in Telugu or Namdev 
and Tukaram in Marathi. Like them he exalted sincerity in life 
above externals such as the worship of idols, pilgrimages and 

The earliest writer of note on Vaishnava topics in Kannada was 
Rudra-bhatta, a smarta Brahmin of the time of Vlra Ballala 
(1172-1219). His jfagannatha-vijaya is a Campu on the life of 






LITERATURE 


387 


popular book of morals for children. A little poem of Kanaka- 
dasa called Rama-dhanya-caritre exalts ragi, the grain which above 
all other grains forms the staple food of a great part of Karnataka. 
Kanakadasa came of the caste of hunters (beda) according to some 
accounts, and of shepherds ( kuruba ) according to others. There 
were many other dasas besides. 

This sketch of Kannada literature may close with the notice 
of some important works of the early seventeenth century. 
Most notable among them is the Karnataka Sabdamisasana (1604) 
of Bhattakalanka Deva, the most comprehensive grammar of 
Kannada in 592 Sanskrit Sutras with a gloss (vritti) and commentary 
(vyakhya) in the same language. Its references to previous 
authorities and citations from leading Kannada writers are of 
value to the student of the history of the language. The author 
was a Jain and was reputed to be learned in six languages. The 
re-consecration of the Gommata statue at Sravana Belgola in 1612 
was described by poet Pancabana of that town in his Bhujaba- 
licaritra (1614) . The Karkala image was rededicated in 1646 
and its history and that of Gommata form the subject of Karkala- 
Gommatesvara-caritra of Chandrama of the Tuluva country. 
Bijjala-raja-caritra, giving the Jaina version of Basava’s life at 
Kalyana, and Jina-muni-tanaya on Jaina morals are other works of 
the period. 

Mention may also be made of collections of short stories the 
dates of which are not settled, but which came into existence 
about the sixteenth century — Battisa-puttali-kathe, Betala- 
panca-vimsati-kathe in the three forms of campu, tripadi and prose, 
Suka-saptati, and so on. Tennala-Ramakrishna-kathe is a collec- 
tion of funny anecdotes of the famous court jester of the court 
of Krishnadeva Raya. 

Telugu 

In ancient times the Telugu country was often called Trilinga, 
the country which contained or was bounded by the three lingas 
of Kalahasti, Sri Sailam and Daksharama, and Telinga-Telugu 
as the name of the country and language may well be traced to 
this word. It is also suggested that Tel(n)ugu comes from tene, 
‘honey’ or tennu, ‘way”. The beginnings of the language can be 
traced from stone inscriptions of the fifth and sixth century a.d., 
and its basic elements have unmistakable affinities with Tamil and 



V HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 


Kannada. But, from the beginning, the literary idiom depend- 
ed very largely upon Sanskrit and the Jandirayachandas , an early 
work on prosody, fragments of which have recently come to light, 
though it includes some metres peculiar to Telugu and unknown 
to Sanskrit, is itself written in Sanskrit throughout; the author 
was most probably the Vishnukundin monarch Madhava-Varman 
II (580-620); who had this title Janasraya. The inscriptions of 
the dynasty are in Sanskrit with an admixture of Prakrit and 
Telugu words. . , __ , 

In the beginning Telugu had much in common with Kannada 
and this affinity persisted to a relatively late stage in the develop- 
ment of the two languages. Pampa and Ponna, two of the greatest 
Kannada poets, came from the Telugu country, and the great 
Telugu poet Srinatha styles himself a poet in Karnata-bhasha. 
Early Telugu prose and verse can now be traced only m mscnp- 
fionolike those of the Telugu-Chodas and the Eastern Chalukyas; 


a well developed verse in stsa metre adorns the grant of General 
Panduranga (845-6). Bey6nd doubt there must have existed much 
unwritten literature of a popular character which enlivened the 
daily life of the common folk; such den compositions may have 
included Idlipdtalu (songs of the cradle), melukolupulu (songs of 
the dawn), mangala hdratulu (songs of festivity), Hrtanalu 
(devotional songs) and udupu pdtalu (songs of the harvest). 

Higher literature strongly influenced by Sanskrit was said to 
be in the mdrga style. Of this class no work earlier than the ele- 
venth century has survived. The beginnings and early history 
of this type of writing can no longer be traced. Some are inclined 
to doubt the existence of a separate mdrga style altogether. 

Telugu literature as we know it begins with Nannaya’s 
translation of the Mahdbhdrata undertaken in the reign of Rajaraja 


Narendra (1019-61). Nannaya undertook the great work at 
the king’s instance and had for his assistant a certain Narayana 
Bhatta, also a talented poet, who was rewarded richly by the mo- 
narch. Rajaraja’s reign was a troubled time, and it is not known 
if the political troubles hampered the work of Nannaya. He was 
able to complete the translation of only two parvas (Adi and Sabha) 
and of a part of the third (Vana). The translation was not literal, 
and the poet allowed himself free scope for the exercise of his 
powers of imaginative creation; he set the model for later trans- 
lators. Nannaya’s vocabulary is dominated by Sanskrit, but he 



LITERATURE 


389 


is never obscure; and the majesty of his diction induced Yerrapra- 
gada, another translator of the Mahabharata, to compare it to a 
noble elephant (bhadragaja). Nannaya was perhaps also author 






and it gave currency to certain com 
been adopted by his successors, 
poets and lavished praise on the trut 


hara-natha asking that Tikkana’s work should be dedicated to him; 
lastly he put in a hymn of praise with every word ending in the 
possessive case ( shashthyantamulu ). The first and last features 
are found in Nanne Choda’s Kumdrasambhava also. Tikkana’s 
compact diction and his marvellous capacity for vivid portraiture 




LITERATURE 391 

Narendra, Nannaya’s patron. He says also that Tikkana appeared 
to him in a dream and urged him to complete the Bhirata. His 
ability as a poet is manifest from the fact that he begins his work 
in the style of Nannaya and, imperceptibly, passes into that of 
Tikkana.’ He was called Prabandha Paramesvara. He also 
translated the Harivamsa, the epilogue to the Bharata which traces 
the occurrences after the war. His other works are: Ramayana 
(not extant), and Laksmi Nrisimha Purina also known as Ahobala 
Mihatmya. 

The three translators of the Mahibhdrata have always been 
held in the highest esteem as the ‘Kavitraya’— the three poets of 
Telugu, and subsequent authors generally began their writings 
by making obeisance to them. 

A contemporary of Yerrapragada was Nachana Soma(i355-77) 
who wrote the Uttar a Hari-oamsa as he was dissatisfied with Yerra- 
pragada’s achievement and wanted to produce a work worthy of 
the theme, and competent critics have held that the poet achieved 
his object. 

The Ramayana was translated by two poets of the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries. Kona Buddharaja, a feudatory of 
Kakatlya Prataprudra II, produced the Ranganitha Ramayana 
in dvipada metre, a work of great simplicity and sweetness and 
full of apt similes. Ranganatha’s relation to the poem is by no 
means clear ; either he was a court poet or possibly the guru of 
the king who dedicated the poem to him. Buddharaja’s sons are 
said to have completed it by adding the Uttar a-Ramiyana. 
The other translation is a Campu by Hullakki Bhaskara and his 
pupils dedicated to a Sahinimara, whose identity is not settled 
beyond dispute. 

Among the contemporaries of Tikkana must be noticed 
Ketana, author of Dasakumiracarita, a translation of Dandin’s 
work which got him the title ‘Abhinava Dandi’, of a grammar 
called Andhra-bhishi-bhushana, and of a translation of Vijiianes- 
vara’s Mitikshara; Marana, a pupil of Tikkana, whose Mir kandey a 
Purina became the basis of Peddana’s Manucaritra; and Mancana 
of Rajahmundry, author of Keyurabihucaritra. Baddena, a 
Chola feudatory of Rudramadevi in the Shatsahasra country, 
wrote the Nitisastramuktavali, a treatise on politics in fifteen 
chapters, and probably also Sumati Sataka, a popular work of 
moral maxims. 




A striking contrast in almost every way to Srinatha was his 
Drother-in-law and junior contemporary, Bammera Potana (1400- 
75), a niyogi from Ontimitta in Cuddapah district and translator of 




work in his life-time and left it as a legacy to his son Mallana. 
Parts of the poem were found later to have suffered damage from 
insects, and the gaps had to be filled in by other hands. The 
sections of the poem on the release of the Gajendra (elephant lord) 
by Vishnu and the marriage of RukminI carry an appeal even to 
the unlettered. Potana perhaps also wrote Virabhadra Vijaya 




394 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Singaya (c. 1480) are important; they were joint authors of 
Varahapurana and Prabodhacandrodaya. The latter, in Prabandha 
form, is far more faithful to its Sanskrit original than either 
Srinatha’s Naishadha or Pina Virabhadra’s Sakuntala. The 
Varahapurana , also a translation from Sanskrit, is dedicated to 
Tuluva Narasanayaka. Peram Raju Jakkana (1450) was the author 
of Vikramdrka-carita narrating the stories centring round the 
legendary monarch of Uijain. Other notable names are: Duggu- 
palli Duggaya (1480), author of Naciketopakhyana, Dubagunta 
Narayana (1470), author of Pahcatantra, Vennalakanti Suranna 
(1460), author of Vishnupurana, and Gaurana, author of Harii- 
candropakhydna. 

The reign of Krishnadeva Raya was a glorious epoch in litera- 
ture as in politics, war and art. The monarch was himself no 
mean scholar and poet, and the impetus he gave to Telugu 
literature lasted far beyond his time. Under his lead the practice 
of translating from Sanskrit originals was generally given up and 
independent Prabandhas which handled a Puranic story or some 
invented theme after the manner of a Mahakavya in Sanskrit 
came more into vogue. The earlier Prabandhas were marked by 
originality, variety, freedom and grace of matter and style; but 
in course of time in the hands of lesser poets the Prabandha 
tended to degenerate into stereotyped and monotonous forms 
which observed the formal rules of rhetoric, but fell far short of 
true literature. 

Krishnadeva Raya’s Amuktamalyada or Vishnucittiya , one of 
the five great Kavyas in Telugu, is among the first fruits of the new 
movement; it also marks the beginning of the influence of Vaish- 
navism on Telugu literature. It deals with the life of the dlvdr 
Vishnucitta (Periyalvar), his exposition of Vaishnava philosophy 
and the love between his foster-daughter Goda and God Ranga- 
natha. The style is involved and complex, the similes are sometimes 
far-fetched, but all the same the effect achieved is majestic and 
sublime. ‘There is hardly a book in Telugu where there is such 
a continued flow of ideas, seeking an impetuous outlet in language 
which, though rich, is yet scarcely equal to the task of full and 
adequate expression. For insight into human nature, and for 
facility in depicting elusive moods by some striking phrase, 
Krishnadeva Raya has no superior, and scarcely an equal.’ He 
was the author of a number of Sanskrit works also. 




LITERATURE 


395 


Like the Nine Gems of Vikramaditya’s court the AshtaJig- 
gajas (the Eight Elephants of die Quarters) of Krishnadeva Raya’s 
court are famous in legend. In either case, popular imagination 
has sought to glorify an intrinsically great name at the cost of histori- 
cal truth. But there were doubtless many great poets who did 
adorn the court of Krishnadeva Raya, and among them Allasani 
Peddana, on whom the emperor conferred the title Andhrakavi- 
tapitamaha (Grandfather of Telugu peotry), stands out foremost. 
He was the son of Chokkanamatya and had his literary training under 
Sathakopayati, a Vaishnava patriarch of the age. His chief work is the 
Svarocisliasambhava or Manucarita. The story is taken from the 
Markandeyapurana. An orthodox Brahmin by name Pravara 
refuses the love offered to him by the divine courtesan Varuthini. 
A gandharva comes to know of this, assumes the guise of Pravara 
and lives with her. Their son was Svarocisha from whom the 
second Manu was bom. As in Kalidasa’s Kumar a-sainbhava, 
interest centres round the parents of the hero whose name the 
work bears, and Peddana’s fame rests on his delineation of Pravara 
and Varuthini. He borrowed from his predecessors like Srinatha 
some features in the development of the theme and in the use of 
Kannada words. Manucarita was dedicated to Krishnadeva Raya 
who marked his appreciation of the poem by being a pole-bearer 
of Peddana’s palanquin. Peddana survived his royal patron and 
bemoaned the years of desolation that followed. Harikatha-sara 
attributed to him is no longer extant. 

Nandi Timmana, the second great poet of Krishnadeva Raya’s 
court, was the author of Parijatapaharana, which elaborates in 
beautiful verse a well-known episode in Sri Krishna’s life. The 
poem is said to have been composed to reconcile the emperor to 
one of his queens, who, he thought, had insulted him by sleeping 
with her legs stretched towards his portrait; Krishna’s efforts to 
appease Satyabhama, particularly the scene of his falling at her feet 
and being spumed by her with a kick, was calculated to hint to the 
emperor the extent of liberties permitted between lovers, and served 
its purpose. A pretty story, but most probably apocryphal. 

Bhattumurti, who came to be known later as Rama Raja 
Bhushana, had a long and distinguished literary career. His 
Narasabhupaliyam is a work on rhetoric written in imitation of 
Vidyanatha’s Prataparudriya and dedicated to Toraganti Narasara- 
ju. His Hariscandra-Nalopakhyanam is a poem in which each 





Prabandha, the only work of its type. The plot 
comedy of errors and grips the attention of the rea 
centre of the plot are Krishna and his seraglio, andinth 




LITERATURE 


397 


the author himself as the best of his works. It deals with a 
Puranic theme in an original dramatic manner. The subject 
is the fall of the powerful Daitya king Vajranabha at the hands of 
Pradyumna, the son of Krishna, followed by the marriage of 
Prabhavati, the daughter of the fallen Daitya, with Pradyumna. 
In this work Suranna’s ‘characters are lifelike, their movements 
spontaneous, their conversations natural and the situations tense 

In some ways the most interesting figure of the time was Tenali 
Ramakrishna who started his career under ICrishnadeva Raya 
but lived on to the reign of Venkata. Posterity remembers him 
more as a court jester who played many practical jokes on high- 
placed men, the monarch himself not excepted; but he was also 
a poet of talent, and his Panduranga Mahatmya , counted among 
the five great Kavyas in Telugu, is a work of high merit which 
narrates the story of a dissipated Brahmin’s soul being successfully 
rescued from the servants of Yama by those of Vishnu, because he 
happened to die in Pandarpur. Ramakrishna also wrote the 
Udbhatacarya-carita and dedicated it to an officer of Krishnadeva 
Raya. 

Though not counted among the ‘great eight’, Sankusala Nri- 
simha Kavi was a distinguished poet of the time. Peddana, it is 
said, out of jealousy, obstructed his approach to the emperor, 
and the poor poet had to sell his poem, Kavikarna Rasayana, 
in the market-place; one of its verses reached the emperor through 
his daughter Mohanangi and, struck with its beauty, Krishnadeva 
Raya sent for the poet, but he had left for Srirangam where he 
dedicated his work to the goddess of the shrine. It treats of the 
life of the mythical emperor Mandhata, and in its prologue 
Nrisimha Kavi roundly denounces bad poets and kings. 

Chintalapudi Ellaya was the author of Radha-madhava-vilasa 
and Vishnumayavilasa; the first work was so much appreciated 
that the poet came to be known by its name. Molla, a poetess of 
the time, bom of a low caste, was the author of the most popular 
version of the Rdmayana , in chaste and simple Telugu. Kamsali 
Rudraya was the author of Nirankusopakhyana, a fascinating 
story of a gifted gambler defeating god Siva, the stake being 
Rambha, the divine dancer; Nirankusa, the victor, lives with 
Rambha though Indra tries to break up their companionship. 
Addanki Gangadhara (1570) wrote the Tapatisamvaranopdkhydna 



398 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

and Ponnaganti Telaganna the Y ayaticaritra; they are both dedi- 
cated to Ibrahim Kutb Shah (1550-83), ruler of Golconda— called 
by the poets Ibha-rama-sauri in their dedication. Venkatanatha 
translated Pancatantra into a Prabandha, instead of a collection 
of stories as in the original. Piduparti Somanatha’s Basava 
Parana is the only Saivawork of the time; the author was afanatical 
Vira-Saiva and his intolerance of Vaishnavism which breaks out 
everywhere in his work is out of place in the tolerant age of Krish- 
nadeva Raya. Sarangu Tammayya and Chadaluvada Mallaya were 
authors of two Vipranarayana-caritas. 

Among the scientific works of the time may be noted Manu- 
manci Bhatta’s Hayalakshana Sastra and Lilavati-ganita by 


slation of Lilavati-ganita in verse form dedicated to an officer of 
Achyuta Raya. 

In the seventeenth century Vijayanagar lost its importance and 
its place was taken by the feudatory courts such as Gandikota, 
Siddhavatam, Nellore, Gingee, Tanjore, and Madura. Matli 
Ananta (1590-1610) of Siddhavatam (Cuddapah district) and his- 
grandson were both poets and composed respectively the Kakus- 
thavijayam and the Kumudvati-kalyanam. About the same time 
Tarigoppula Mallana wrote a Prabandha— Candrabhdnu caritra 
—at the instance of Pemmasani Timmanayudu. Interesting in 
its own way, this Prabandha ranks far belowthe masterpieces of the 
age of Krishnadeva Raya. Nellore was made famous by the work 
of Pushpagiri Timmana who rendered Bhartrihari’s Nitiiataka 
into Telugu and described the exploits of Hanuman in a poem 
called Samirakumaravijayam. He gathered round him a circle of 
talented friends including the celebrated Kankanti brothers — 
Paparaja and Narasimha. Paparaja’s Uttararamdyana challenges 
comparison with the best works in Telugu ; he also wrote a yaksha- 
gdna Vishmimayavilasa. His less celebrated brother Narasimha 



LITERATURE 


399 


poems — the Vdlmiki-caritram and Rdmayanam. The former is 
the first important prose work in the language; the latter, 
though incomplete, shows Raghunatha’s art at its best. Less 
talented than his father, Vijayaraghava, the son of Raghunatha, 
also composed poems and yakshagdnas but his fame rests more 
securely on the poets patronized by him. Among them was the 
celebrated Chemakuri Venkatakavi whose poems Sarangadhara- 
caritram and Vijayavilasa handle respectively the themes of 
Chitrangi’s love for her step-son and Aijuna’s pilgrimage to the 
sacred tirthas and his marriages with the naga princess UlucI and 
with Subhadra, the sister of Sri Krishna. The Vijayavilasa is 
rightly counted as one of the great Kavyas in Telugu. One of 
the queens of Vijayaraghava, Rangajamma, contributed to the 
development of the yakshagana in her Mannarudasavilasa where 
she employs more characters than usual and frequently uses prose 
in conversations instead of song. Savaram Chinna Narayanaraju 
who lived in South Arcot and wrote an excellent Kavya Kuvala- 
yaSvacaritra was another poet notable for the grace of his manner 
and his wit. Lastly Kadiripati, a cousin of Ramaraja, the com- 
mander-in-chief of Sriranga III, composed the Stikasaptati , a 
work of great literary excellence in which he perfected the art 
of story-telling. 

MalayAlam 

Malayalam was the last of the South Indian languages to 
develop a separate existence and a literature of its own. In the 
Sangam age, the present Malayalam area was a land of Tamil 
speech though grammarians recognized that the dialect of the 
mountain country deviated from standard Tamil in many ways. 
The Sangam literature contains many words and expressions that 
survive in Malayalam today though they have gone out of use in 
Tamil. Attempts to derive Malayalam from Sanskrit or to pos- 
tulate for it an origin independent alike of Sanskrit and Tamil, 
are clearly misplaced, and there can be no doubt that it was a natural 
growth through centuries from the form of ‘Kodum-Tamil' that 
prevailed in Kerala at the beginning of the Christian era. The 
literary idiom of Malayalam, like that of Kannada and Telugu, 
borrowed freely from Sanskrit, and in order to express the Sans- 
krit sounds adequately, it had to discard the old Vatteluttu 
script and evolve a new script based on Tamil-grantha. This 






messenger is required to pay his respects to Ravivarman (Kulasek- 
hara), the great ruler of Quilon, and other contemporary rulers 
are also mentioned in the poem. The style of the work shows a 
large admixture of Sanskrit, and is in fact manipravalam, like 
most works of Malayalam literature. It is universally accepted as 
one of the most exquisite poems in the language. 

Prior to the date of this sandeia poem, there had come into 
existence popular ballads of various kinds, now known as Palaiya- 
pattus, old songs. Though in their present form they appear in a 
very modernized garb, competent critics hold that some of them 
at least must be of really early origin. There were many varieties 
of these folk songs such as Brdhmanip-pattu sung in marriages, 
Bhadrakdlip-pdttu and Sdstdp-pattu in praise of the respective 
deities, Yatrakkalip-pattu and Tiruvadiraip-pattu which take their 
names from the festive occasions when they were sung; they appear 
to have been generally accompanied by dance. Similar in charac- 


>n account of the continuous themes they handled, 
Pattola of which only 
terature shows the least 


nes A.D. ; and the somewhat later Kamakathap-pattu 
AyyipiHai ASan. Both these works show signs of a 
J influence in respect of words and metres, 
ut the thirteenth century a strong impetus to literature 
he development of Cakkiyar-kuttu, a dance-recital of 
ts which grew out of a simple and earlier form of the 



verse, and Prabandhas came to be written under the inspiration of 
Sanskrit influences. Poetry follows Sanskrit metres and the 
prose passages are also really poetical in content and conception. 
Puranic stories and episodes form the themes of these compositions ; 
but extraneous matter is often introduced and the Campus 
abound in satirical references to contemporary usages and per- 
sonalities. They were mostly written by Nambudiri Brahmins, 
a class well known for their mordant wit and sarcasm, employed 
to good purpose in these works. Perhaps the most famous of them 
was Punam Nambudiri of the fifteenth century to whom many 
Campus are ascribed; the Ramdyana-campu is unquestionably his 
masterpiece. Second only to Punam was Malamangalam Nam- 
budiri, an inspired poet of the sixteenth century, who was gifted 
with a vivid imagination and an easy flow of language. His 
great work is the Naishadha-campu in which piquant situations 
like Nala leaving his kingdom and Damayanti lamenting over her 
separation from him are portrayed with great effect. These 
front-rank writers were followed by imitators of lesser calibre 
among whom Narayanan, the author of the Bharata-campu , is 
the most notable. 

Mention must be made of the Niranam poets so called from 
their native village Niranam in central Travancore, who from the 
fifteenth century sought to develop an independent Malayalam 
style relatively free from the domination of Tamil and Sanskrit 
models. Most prominent among them was Rama Panikkar, author 
of the Ramayanam, popularly known as Kannassa Ramayanam , 
which narrates the whole of the Rama story. He was also the 
author of Bharata Gdthd, Savitri Mdhdtmyam, Brahmanda- 
puranam, and Bhagavatam. His poems are marked by great 
narrative power and he has been called ‘the Chaucer of Malayalam’. 
The translation of the Gita by Madhava Panikkar, the maternal 
grandfather of Rama Panikkar, also deserves more than a passing 
mention. The Niranam poets also popularized a metre which 
takes its name after them, Niranavrittam, but even this is seen to 
have its prototype in Tamil. 

Cherusseri Nambudiri (early sixteenth century), author of the 
Krishnagatha, may be said to close the middle Malayalam period 



402 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

and herald the literature of modern Malayalam. The subject- 
matter of his great poem is the entrancing theme of the life ot Sri 
Krishna as narrated in the tenth skandha of the Bhdgavata, and 
Cheni&Seri’s gdthd is hailed by critics as a marvellous work of art 
which captivates the mind of the reader by the wealth of its imagery 
and the rich harmony of sense and sound. 

For some time after CherusSeri, only local songs and ballads, 
like some of the Vadakkan-pdttukkal . the Anju Tampurdn Pdttu 
and Eravikuttipilla-pdttu , were produced. These continued the old 
tradition of popular songs on contemporary events which ushered 
Malayalam literature into being. The great luminary after CheruS- 


its shape to modem Malayalam. His chief works were : Adhyatma 
Rdmdyanam-Kilippdttu , Bhdratam Kilippdttu, Harindmakirta- 
nam, Cintdratnam—a work on Advaita Vedanta, and perhaps also 
Bhagavatam Kilippdttu and Devimdhdtmyam. It will be seen that 
he covers practically the whole range of Hindu mythology giving 
his own versions of the two great epics and Bhagavatam, and did 
not neglect religion and philosophy. The kilippdttu reached its 
perfection in his hands, and he is hailed as the genius who con- 
ferred literary dignity on the daily speech of the common man by- 
adapting it to the highest purposes of literary art. Eluttaccan’s 
date is not settled beyond dispute, but he may be placed late in 
the sixteenth or early in the seventeenth century. 

A word must be said about Attakatha or Kathakali. This 
variety of dance drama was till a few years ago believed to be a 
development of recent origin, not older than two or three centuries 
at the most. Recent research has shown, however, that the first 
Attakathas were composed towards the close of the fifteenth cen- 
tury, and that the Rdman-dttam of Kottarakkara Tampuran, meant 
to be completed in eight performances, is the earliest of the extant 
Attakathas; though there is no direct evidence, the author may be 
taken to belong to the sixteenth century. Later contributions to 
this type of popular literature — about two hundred Kathas have 
so far been listed — lie outside the period covered by this book. 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



purana, a bhakti very different from the calm, dignified devotion 
of the Bhagavatas of the early centuries before and after Christ 
in Northern India. Again, from South India arose the two schools 
of Vedic exegesis — Mimamsa — that go by the names of Kumarila- 
bhatta and Prabhakara. The founders of the three main systems of 
Vedanta — Sankara, Ramanuja and Madhva — also hailed from the 
southern country. Yet another prominent philosophical system — 
the Saiva-siddhanta — also found its exponents in the Tamil 






RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


405 


Jains were found in considerable numbers in different parts of the 
country following their practices without let or hindrance. In 
the story of Manimekalai, for instance, we find the heroine advised 
to study in Ranchi the philosophical systems of the Veda, Siva, 
Vishnu, Ajlvika, Jaina and of the Sankhya, Vaiseshika and 

But soon a great change came — particularly in the Tamil 
country — and people began to entertain fears of the whole land 
going over to Jainism and Buddhism. At any rate, worshippers 
of Siva and Vishnu felt the call to stem the rising tide of heresy. 
The growth, on the one hand, of an intense emotional bhakti to 
Siva or Vishnu and, on the other, of an outspoken hatred of Bud- 
dhists and Jains, are the chief characteristics of the new epoch. 
Challenges to public debate, competition in the performance of 
miracles, tests of the truth of doctrines by means of ordeal, became 
the order of the day. Parties of devotees under the leadership 
of one gifted saint or another traversed the country many times 
over, singing, dancing and debating all their way. This great 
wave of religious enthusiasm attained its peak in the early seventh 
century and had not spent itself in the middle of the ninth. 

Later tradition counted sixty-three nayanars, individual and 
collective, as the most prominent leaders of this revival on the side 
of the Saivas. The individuals included a woman from Karaikal, 
and a pariah, Nandan from Adanur, besides a general of the Pallava 
forces, Siruttondar. But most prominent among them were the 
three great men whose hymns are collected together in the 
Devaram. First came TirunavukkaraSu, a Vellala from Tiruvamur 
and contemporary of the Pallava ruler Mahendravarman I. 
Though bom in an orthodox Saiva family he was attracted to 
Jainism in his early years, and joined the Jaina monastery at 
Pataliputra (Cuddalore) as a monk. His elder sister, who had 
watched his change of faith with untold regret, implored Siva’s 
help. Her prayer was answered: Dharmasena, for that was her 
brother’s name in the monastery, became the victim of an incurable 
abdominal disorder. When all his fellow-Jainas failed him, he was 
compelled to go and seek his sister’s aid. She secured his cure by 
the grace of the God of Tiruvadigai. The news of his defection 
greatly upset the Jaina monks of Pataliputra who trumped up 
many false charges against Dharmasena to poison the mind of 
Mahendravarman against him. He was subjected to many trials 



406 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

and tortures which, however, by the grace of Siva he easily 
surmounted. Finally, the king himself was convinced of the superi- 
ority of Saivism, and embraced it. Whatever element of truth 
there may be in the life-story of Tirunavukkara^u or Appar which 
we have sketched above, a verse in the Trichinopoly inscription of 
Mahendravarman furnishes clear proof that the king did indeed 
turn to Saivism from some other creed. The rest of Appar’s 
long life of 8 1 years was spent in pilgrimages during which he met 
many contemporary nayandrs, of whom Nanasambandar was the 
most notable, indeed the greatest of them all. 

Nanasambandar was a Brahmin of the Kaundinya gotra from 
Shiyali in the Tanjore district. There are few Saiva temples in 
the Tamil country today where worship is not offered to him. 
Legend avers that as a child of three he got the milk of divine 
knowledge from Parvati herself and narrated the incident to his 
father in song. The father at once realized the divinity of his 
child and carried him on his shoulders from one Saiva shrine to 
another until he was relieved by the present from the gods of a 
pearl palanquin for his son’s use. At that time the Pandya country 
was almost completely overrun by Jainism, and thePandyan queen, 
a princess from the Chola country, and the minister Kulaccirai, 
both of whom were Saivas, sent Sambandar an urgent invitation 
to come and release the Pandya and his country from the tighten- 
ing grip of Jainism. Nanasambandar betook himself to Madura, 
foiled all the conspiracies of the Jains against him, vanquished 
them in debate and converted the king and his subjects to Saivism. 
The story goes that on this occasion 8,000 Jains were put to death 
by impalement, and a festival in the Madura temple is supposed 
to commemorate the gruesome event to this day. This, however, 
is little more than an unpleasant legend and cannot be treated as 
history. There is no reason to believe that, even in those days of 
intense religious strife, intolerance descended to such cruel barba- 
rities. Nor are we asked to believe the story of his marriage. 
It is said that when, at the age of sixteen, he was married, the cere- 
mony had hardly been completed when the newly wedded pair and 
all the wedding party were absorbed into the god-head. Sam- 
bandar had disputations with the Buddhists also and visited many 
shrines and sang hundreds of hymns in his short life-time. He 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 407 

contemporary was either Maravarman Avanisulamani or his 
grandson Arikesari Maravarman. 

About a century later came Sundaramurti of Navalur. He 
was bom of poor Brahmin parents but his beauty as a child was 
such that he attracted the attention of the local chieftain Narasinga 
Munaiyadaraiyan who, with the consent of the parents, brought 
him up. When his marriage with a girl of his own caste was about 
to take place it was stopped by the mysterious intervention of Siva 
who claimed him as his slave. A little later Sundara fell in love 
with two women, one a dancing-girl of Tiruvalur and the other a 
sudra girl of Tiruvorriyur. Their jealousies, it is said, could only 
be resolved by Siva himself acting as a messenger to one of them. 
Like the other nayandrs , Sundara is also credited with many 
miracles and the contemporary Chera ruler, Cheraman Perumal, was 
his friend. They visited each other regularly and made theirlast 
journeyto the abode of Siva in Mount Kailasa together, Sundara on 
a white elephant and Cheraman Perumal on a horse. Sundara’s 
devotion to Siva was that of an intimate friend so that he was given 
the title Tambiran-Tolan (‘Friend of God’). 

A little later than Sundara came the illustrious Manikka-viUagar. 
Legend makes him the minister of a Pandyan king; and on his 
account Siva, the presiding deity of Madura, is said to have per- 
formed many miracles. His Pandyan contemporary was most 
probably Varaguna II (862-80). Manikka-vaSagar is said to have 
debated with Buddhists from Ceylon at Chidambaram and to 
have utterly vanquished them. His hymns form the Tiruvasagam 
(‘The Sacred Word’) and another work, Tiruccirrambalakkovai, 
is also ascribed to him. 

The hymns of Sambandar, Appar and Sundara form a varied 
treasure-house of religious experience which tells of mystical 
raptures and ecstasies, of moments of light when there is a vision 
of God and the world is transfigured in the light of his love, and of 
periods of gloom when all is dark and the blind seeker is filled with 
a sense of fear. Somewhat different and more exuberant are the 
outpourings of Manikka-va^agar whose confessions are more out- 
spoken and whose devotion is more impassioned. Some of them 
were keen controversialists and had no soft word for Buddhists 
and Jains. 

The Vaishnava wing of the movement is represented by twelve 
■ahars (‘divers’ into the qualities of God) for whom orthodox 



to a’ really early datefor them— not later than the fifth or the sixth 
century A.D. 

Then came Tirumalisai, bom in the village of that name in 
Chingleput district and most probably an elder contemporary of 
Pallava Mahendravarman I. The story goes that at birth he was a 
shapeless mass of flesh abandoned by his parents and brought up 
by a Si idra. He is said to have practised Jainism, Buddhism and 
Saivism before settling down finally as a Vaishnava yogi. His 
poems show a more controversial tone than those of the first three 
alvars, and this was quite natural to his age. 

After him we might place Tirumangai, one of the most 
celebrated of the alvars. He was the petty chieftain of Alinadu 
in the Tanjore district who, legend says, became a highway- 
man in order to carry off and marry the daughter of a 
Vaishnavite doctor of a higher caste, for whom he also 
changed his religion. He is said to have stolen a solid golden 
image of Buddha from a monastery in Negapatam to pay for 
renovating the temple of Srirangam. The clear reference to Vai- 
ramegha in his hymns places him in the middle of the eighth century, 
a date which is confirmed by the story of his friendly meeting with 
Nanasambandar at Shiyali. Neither story can be treated as 
history, though each in its own way furnishes a clue to what his 
followers believed in later times. His hymns, and they are many, 
are equally full of good poetry and attacks on Jainism and 
Buddhism. To Saivism, on the whole, he evinced a more friendly 
attitude and there are many resemblances in literary form and 
religious sentiments between Nanasambandar and Tirumangai. 

A little later than Tirumangai, about the close of the eighth 
and the beginning of the ninth century, came a number of alvars. 
Periyalvar, a Brahmin of Srivilliputtur, won a religious disputation 
in the court of the Pandya king Srimara Sri Vallabha (815-62). 
The only woman among them, Andal or Kddai (Skt. Goda), was 



and Tamil, was the next alvar who, among other shrines of Vishnu, 
sang of those at Chidambaram and at Tiruvali — the latter, no 
doubt, a foundation of Tirumangai. Lastly came the celebrated 
Nammajvar and his pupil Madhurakavi. The former was bom 
of a Veljala family of Alvartirunagari (also called Kurugur) in the 
Tinnevelly district. His personal name was Maran and he seems 
to have gained the name Sathakopa on the occasion of his initiation. 
He renounced the world in his thirty-fifth year to practise yoga. 
His hymns, the largest in number after those of Tirumangai, are 
rightly regarded as embodying the deepest religious experience 
and philosophic thought of one of the greatest seers of the world. 

YuanChwang, who visited South India in 642, when the Hindu 
revival was just gathering momentum, did not notice the new 
movement, although in speaking of Maharashtra he mentions the 
worshippers of Deva (Siva) who covered themselves with ashes. 
He mentions with regret that his own creed — Buddhism — was on 
the decline, but remarks repeatedly that it had yielded to Digam- 
bara Jainism. The triumph of the revivalist movement was largely 
achieved in the two centuries that followed. Public disputations 
which led kings and rulers to transfer their allegiance from one 
creed to another did much to bring this about. More important, 
however, was the use of the popular speech by the nayanars and 
the alvars in their soul-stirring compositions, and the fact that these 
were set to simple tunes which the masses loved to sing. 

Another important, though less popular, aspect of the same 
revival is seen in the work of Kumarila and Sankara. They were 
Smartas (traditionalists) who laboured in the cause not of any 



410 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

one sect in particular but of the ancient brahminical religion as 
it had been developed through the centuries. They held up as 
the religious ideal a youth occupied with ritual observances 
followed by an old age given up to philosophic contemplation. 
Rumania frequently attacks Buddhists in his works, and tradition 
asserts that he did much to discredit them in the course of his 
many scholarly journeys. He elucidated the philosophy of ritual- 
ism (MImamsa) in all its aspects, but Sankara was the greater 
thinker. Few details of his life are very well attested, but he is 
generally taken to be a Nambudiri Brahmin from Raladi on the 
banks of the Alwaye river in north Travancore, where he was 
born in 788. He lost his father early in life and turned ascetic, 
with Govinda yogi, a pupil of Gaudapada, as his guru. In a short 
life he travelled all over India propagating his new philosophy of a 
rigorously consistent monism and triumphing against all rivals who 
met him in debate. He reorganized the ascetic order of Hinduism 
on the model of the Buddhist order, and founded a number of 
mathas in different parts of India, the best known being those at 
Sringeri, Dvaraka, Badrinath, Puri and Ranchi. His philosophy, 
which traces all apparent multiplicity and difference to illusion 
(mdyd), is indeed derived from the Upanishads, but clearly owes 
much in detail to Mahayanist speculation; nevertheless, he regard- 
ed Buddhism as Hinduism’s chief enemy. Within a few years 
of his death in 820, one of his pupils, Sivasoma, was spreading his 
doctrine in distant Rambuja across the seas. Not without justice, 
it has been said that Sankara ‘would have a higher place among the 
famous names of the world had not his respect for tradition 
prevented him from asserting the originality which he undoubtedly 
possessed’. 

The work of the poet-saints of the Pandya-Pallava period was 
continued in the age of the Cholas by a succession of poets and 
teachers of second rank. The Tamil hymns of the last age came 
to be treated as equal to the Veda and were collected and arranged 
in canonical books. Gradually they were regularly employed in 
the daily worship in temples, and their authors came to be regular- 
ly worshipped as manifestations of divinity. In fact the rise of the 
temple to an important place in the religious and social life of the 
land was the direct result of the revivalist movement. The age 
of the Imperial Cholas saw the construction of stone temples, 
great and small, in almost every town and village in their extensive 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 411 

empire. The great temples of Tanjore and Gangaikonda- 
solapuram were symbolic of the new age and, among many 
others, they were celebrated in hymns by contemporary poets. 

The Saiva canon, in which these hymns also found a place, 
was arranged in the first instance in the reign of Rajaraja I by Nambi 
Andar Nambi and continuously added to till about the middle 
of the twelfth century. The Vaishnava canon, on the other hand, 
received its definitive shape at the hands of Nathamuni (985-1030). 
In his works he expressed the clear need he felt for the support 
and guidance of a living God, and pointed the way to a philosophi- 
cal justification of the path of love. His grandson Ajavandar, also 
called Yamunacarya in memory of his visits to the sacred spots of 
Krishna’s youth, was the next great name in the succession of 
Vaishnava acaryas of the period. In his early years he was a 
man of the world, but a follower of Nathamuni called him to the 
higher life. He then turned ascetic and led the life of a religious 
teacher, gathering disciples round him and preaching, writing 
and conducting debates. In his writings, often cited by Ramanuja, 
‘he sought to establish the real existence of the supreme soul, and 
the eternal independence of the individual soul’. 

The greatest of the Vaishnava acaryas was undoubtedly 
Ramanuja. Bom at Sriperumbudur, near Madras, in the first 
quarter of the eleventh century, he had his early philosophical 
training under Yadavaprakasa of Kanchipuram who belonged to 
the school of Sankara. Yamunacarya is said to have once met 
Ramanuja at Kanchi but, unwilling to disturb the progress of the 
youth’s studies, he uttered a prayer for the increase of Sri Vaishna- 
vas and went back to Srirangam. Ramanuja then disagreed with 
the teachings of his guru and was strongly attracted by those in the 
Srirangam school. Yamuna sent for him, but breathed his last 
before Ramanuja could reach him. He succeeded Yamuna as 
head of the matha at Srirangam, which gave him control over the 
temple and the school and a position of authority in the sect. He 
soon proved his mettle as a teacher and organizer, and his influence 
grew day by day. In his lectures and writings he refuted the 
Mayavada of Sankara, demonstrated that the Upanishads did not 
teach a strict monism, and built up the philosophy of Vifehtadvaita 
which reconciled devotion to a personal God with the philosophy 
of the Vedanta by affirming that ‘the soul, though of the same sub- 
stance as God and emitted from him rather than created, can obtain 







port for his teachings mainly from the Puranas and other later 
literature. He taught that the Universe is ruled by God as two 
persons — Vishnu and Lakshml — and that the souls in the world 
are eternally distinct from Him. He recognized different orders 
of souls and consigned some of them to eternal damnation, which 
has led some modern critics to hold that ‘it is impossible not 
to see traces of Christian influence’ in his teaching. The centre 
of his religion is bhakti to Krishna as taught in the Bhagavata, 
Radha having no place in it; but all other avatar as are revered, 
Siva is worshipped, and ‘the five gods’ ( Pancayatana ) are 
recognized. 

The thirteenth and fourteenth centuries witnessed the rise of 
a schism among the followers of Ramanuja due to a difference in 
their interpretation of prapatti (surrender). Some held that the 
devotee had to exert himself to win the grace of the Lord, while 
others thought that the Ix>rd’s grace by itself conferred salvation 
on the soul that had entered the path of surrender. The position 
of the first school, Vadagalai (northern branch), is commonly 
summed up in the phrase Markatakisoranyaya, the rule that the 
young monkey clings to its mother with an effort, and that of the 
second school, the Tengalai, is called Marjarakisoranyaya, the 
rule of the kitten which is carried by its mother in her mouth. 
There are other differences between the two schools, one of them 
being a decided preference for Tamil as against Sanskrit on the part 




414 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

of the Tengalais. The southern school looks upon Pillai Lokacarya 
(b. 1213) as its founder. He was the author of eighteen esoteric 
treatises ( rahasyas ), and had to leave Srirangam with the sacred 
image during the period of the Muslim inroads. He found an 
influential expositor in Manavala Mahamuni (b. circa 1370), the 
next great teacher and writer in the southern school. The leader 
of the northern school was Vedanta Deiika (b. 1268). He once 
hid himself under a mass of dead bodies in Srirangam on the occa- 
sion of a Muslim incursion and escaped to Mysore until the storm 
blew over. As we have seen, he was poet, philosopher, and man 
of affairs. 

Another development of Vaishnavism based on the Bhagavata 
was the rise from the close of the thirteenth century of a number of 
poet-saints whose popular songs stirred the life of Maharashtra 
as those of the nayanars and the alvars had stirred the Tamil 
country centuries before. The earliest of them was Jhanesvara, 
popularly called Dnyandev Dnanoba— a pupil according to some 
accounts of Vishnusvami, who was a dualist and founder of a sect 
of his own. JnaneSvara was the author of an extensive work in 
Marathi verse on the Bhagavad-gita. His tone is Advaitic, though 
he also lays great stress on yoga; he was also the author of many 
abhangs or hymns. The movement begun by him continued 
through a succession of saints to Tukaram, the contemporary of 
Shivaji. 

Vaishnavism continued to be one of the dominant forces 
influencing the life of the people. No striking developments took 
place in the rest of our period in doctrine or practice. Occasionally 
the cult, especially that of Radha, tended to degenerate into erotic 
excesses. This is particularly true of the followers of Vallabha- 
carya(i479-i53i), a Telugu Brahmin contemporary of Chaitanya. 
He was bom in Benares, wrote several works in Sanskrit including 
a commentary on the Vedantasutra and became the founder of a 
system called Suddhadvaita which exalted bhakti above knowledge. 
He is said to have vanquished smarta scholars in public debate 
at the court of Krishnadeva Raya. The acaryas of the sect were 
known as Maharajas and lived luxurious lives. The highest 
ambition of his followers was to become gopis and sport eternally 
with Krishna in his Heaven, an ideal which in practice degenerated 
into gross eroticism. Further, disputes between rival sects some- 
times flared up with unusual violence. Nevertheless, Vaishnavism 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 415 

continued to be, in general, a noble and sweet influence on life. 
The Rayas of Vijayanagar were great patrons of Vaishnavism; 
in 1556 Sadasiva, at the request of Rama Raya, gave thirty-one 
villages to maintain the temple of Ramanuja and the institutions 
attached to it at Sriperumbudur. 

To return to the history of Saivism; we must note that by the 
side of the pure school of bhakti represented by the three saints of 
Devaram and Manikka-vasagar, there existed other types of wor- 
shippers of Siva whose tenets and practices are gruesome and 
repellent to modem taste. Such were the Pasupatas, Kapalikas, 
Kalamukhas, and others whose presence in considerable numbers 
in centres like Kanchi, Tiruvorriyur, Melpadi and Kodumbalflr 
is attested by inscriptions and literature from the seventh century 
onwards. Smearing the body with ashes from a burning ghat, 
eating food in a skull, and keeping a pot of wine, were some of the 
common practices of the Kalamukhas; and some of these sects, if 
not all, were addicted to the worship of the female principle, which 
often degenerated into licentious orgies. The practice of the 
devotee offering his own head as a sacrifice to the goddess is shown 
in the sculpture and literature of the age of the Pallavas and Cholas. 

In the Deccan, under the Chalukyas of Badami and the Rash- 
trakutas of Manyakheta, both Saivism and Vaishnavism flourished 
although Saivism was, perhaps, the more favoured creed. Magni- 
ficent temples were built at Badami, Pattadakal, Mahakuta, Ellora, 
and other places, arcakas (priests) were imported from the Saiva 
acaryas on the banks of the Ganges, and daily worship and periodi- 
cal festivals in these temples were richly endowed. At the same 
time the performance of Vedic sacrifices was continued, vratas 
(religious vows) were observed and danas (gifts) made. The 
worship of Kartikeya attained such prominence in the Bellary 
region in the tenth century that two tapovanas were dedicated to 
him as the supreme deity, a development initiated by some teachers 
from Bengal. In the Andhra country also, where Buddhism had 
flourished in great strength in the early centuries of the Christian 
era, there came about a strong Hindu revival. Besides the more 
famous shrines of Kalahasti, Daksharama, and SrKailam, the 
temples of Mahasena (Kartikeya) at Chebrolu, Humkarasankari at 
Bidapura, and Malles vara at Bezwada became important centres of 
pilgrimage. Mathas grew up and were occupied by monks who 
fed the poor, tended the sick, consoled the dejected and set up 


adoration to serpents which they keep in stables and feed as well as 
they can, believing this to be a meritorious work. Lastly there are 
some who give themselves no trouble about any kind of devotion, 
and deny everything.’ 

Two developments in Saivism which occurred in the twelfth 
and thirteenth centuries in the Tamil country and in the Deccan 
deserve particular mention. The first is the development of the 
Tamil Saiva-siddhanta philosophy based on the Agamas. The 
Agamas are first mentioned by Sundaramurti, and the Tirumandiram 
of Tirumular (ninth century) is the earliest work to reflect the 
theology of the Agamas. Agamic terminology is also found in 
the writing of Manikka-vasagar, who frequently speaks of the Aga- 
mas as revealed by Siva and openly expresses his dislike of the 
Vedanta, by which he means the monism of Sankara. But the 
first definite formulation of the philosophy of the Tamil Saiva- 
siddhanta was in the work of Meykandadeva, a pious Vellala who 
lived early in the thirteenth century on the banks of the Pennar 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


417 


to determine the relations of God, matter and the soul. It declared 
that matter and souls were, like God, eternal. The Absolute 
through its ‘grace-form’ is for ever engaged in the rescue of souls 
from the bondage of matter and the three stains ( malas ) which 
defile their purity. ‘As body and mind together form a unity so 
God is the soul whose body is the Universe of nature and of man. 
He is not identical with either; He is not their substance but he 
dwells in them and they in Him. Advaita is not Oneness, but 
inseparability. To realize this union is the high calling of the 
soul.’ It is for the guru or the teacher to let in the light, but Siva 
is the source of all enlightenment, sole embodiment of intelligence 
and grace, and hence the true object of all devout aspiration. 
The system transcends caste and ritual and calls for inner devotion. 
According to one writer contentment, justice and wisdom are the 
flowers of worship. 

The other development in Saivism (also based on the twenty- 
eight SaivaAgamas) was the growth of Vira-Saivism or the Lingayat 
cult in Karnataka and the Telugu country. Basava, the prime 
minister of Kalacuri Bijjala, king at Kalyani (1156), is usually 
regarded as the founder of the sect, although an inscription of about 
the same time seems to make Ekantada Ramayya of Ablur the real 
leader of the movement, Basava coming in later as a political ally. 
Lingayat tradition avers that the sect is very old and was founded 
by five ascetics — Ekorama, Panditaradhya, Revana, Manila, and 
Visvaradhya — who were held to have sprung from the five heads 
of Siva. Basava, they say, was but the Reviver of the Faith; but 
we know for a fact that the five ascetics named were all contempora- 
ries of Basava, some older, some younger. The early history of 
Vira-Saivism is therefore still somewhat uncertain. Two features 
of the sect, however — the prominent place held by monasteries, 
and the more or less complete social and religious equality among 
the sectarians — have been held to be due to the influence of Jainism 
and Islam. Lingayats regard Siva as supreme and must worship 
only Him; hence the name Vira-Saivas, stalwart Saivas. They 
must also worship each his own chosen guru. Each Lingayat, man 
or woman, carries a Unga about his person, usually in a silver or 
wooden reliquary suspended from the neck. Reverence is paid 
by Lingayats to the sixty-three ndyanars of the Tamil country 
whom they recognize as Puratanas (elders) and to seven hundred 
and seventy later saints among whom are included Manikka- vasagar. 




418 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Basava, and his chief disciples. An account of Lingayat literature 

has been given already. 

The Aradhya Saivas of the Telugu country differed from the 
Lingayats in some respects. They followed Mallikaijuna Pandi- 
taradhya, a contemporary of Basava, in refusing to accept the 
latter’s rejection of the Veda and renunciation of caste. But the 
relations of Aradhya gaivism with Lingayatism were friendly, and 
both joined together in the fourteenth century in resisting the 
inroads of Muslims and in preparing the way for the foundation of 
Vijayanagar. 

Under the Rayas of Vijayanagar all types of religion found 
encouragement, and most of the famous temples of South India 
were enlarged at this time, particularly by the addition of large 
gopuras or entrance towers and corridors and mandapas. A few 
temples were altogether rebuilt on a new integral plan, like that of 
Madura under Tirumalai Nayaka (1623-59). The periodical 
festivals in most of these temples were also richly endowed, and 
brought together people from all classes of society including groups 
of peripatetic merchants and traders. The festivals of the capital 
city of Vijayanagar, in particular the Mahanavami (nine days’ 
festival) in October, were occasions of great display which have 
been described by many foreign travellers who had occasion to 
witness them. Their accounts leave little doubt that there was 
widespread slaughter of buffaloes and sheep as sacrifices to 
the goddess, hook-swinging, and other bad practices of a similar 
character. 


BUDDHISM AND JAINISM 
The early history of Buddhism in South India has been inci- 
dentally sketched in the opening chapters of this book. Its decline 
in Andhradega, where it had flourished in the early centuries A.D., 
was noticed by Yuan Chwang, and this decline proceeded further 
after his time. The renascent Hinduism of the period began the 
worship of the Buddha at Amaravatl as an incarnation of Vishnu 
and seems likewise to have converted many other Buddhist 
centres into Hindu shrines. In the Tamil country. Buddhism 
declined rapidly as a result of the activities of the Hindu saints and 
reformers which we have noticed in this chapter, but it lingered on 
feebly in different parts of the country. Under the Cholas there 
•were Buddhist settlements in Negapatam on the east coast and at 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 419 

Srimulavasam in the west; and Buddhism was considered suffi- 
ciently important for some scenes from Buddha’s life to be repre- 
sented in decorative panels in a balustrade of the great temple of 
Tanjore. An important work of Tamil grammar, the Virasoliyam 
composed in Vlrarajendra’s time, had a Buddhist scholar for its 
author. One section of Kanchipuram bore the name of Buddha- 
kanchi to a relatively late date, and a Buddhist monk from one of the 
monasteries there sang the praises of a Hindu ruler of eastern 
Java in the fourteenth century. 


In the north-west of the Deccan also, new viharas were coming 
up on behalf of Buddhism late in the ninth century. Thus, in 



one hundred gold drammas. In the same neighbourhood a 
meditation hall was constructed for monks in 877 by a minister of 
the Silaharas of Konkan, and other endowments are recorded at 
the same time and place for the regular worship of the Buddha. 

On the whole, however, Jainism had more influence than Budd- 
hism on the life of the people, particularly in Karnataka and in the 
Tamil country owing to the striking contributions made by Jaina 
authors to the literatures of Kannada and Tamil. Some account 
of them has already been given in the last chapter on literature. 
The Jaina temple built at Aihole by Raviklrti in the reign of Pula- 
kerin II is said to have been the abode of all excellences, and Jaina 
temples and monasteries continued to be built everywhere in the 
extensive dominions ruled by the Chalukyas and the Rashtrakutas. 
Rashtrakuta Amoghavarsha I, for instance, found solace by retiring 
to a Jaina monastery more than once in the course of his long reign. 
Many of the early Western Ganga monarchs were followers of 
Jainism, and it also found patronage under the Eastern Chalukyas, 
Amma II (mid-tenth century) built two Jinalayas and established 
satras (feeding houses) attached to them where sramanas (Jaina 
monks) of all the four castes were to be fed. 

Jainism had much more in common with Hinduism than 
Buddhism, and many popular beliefs and practices were common 
to both the systems. Thus in 8iz a Jaina temple was endowed for 
the removal of trouble caused to a Chalukya Vimaladitya by the 
planet SanaiScara (Saturn). In many Jaina grants we find that the 
donees are required to use the proceeds of the endowment for their 
daily rites and observances in terms identical with those employed 




420 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

in Hindu donations; and influential guilds of merchants often 
included a strong Jaina wing in their membership. Soon after 
the establishment of Vijayanagar, Jains complained to king 
Bukkaraya of persecution by the Vaishnavas. The monarch 
interceded (1368) and decreed that both parties should practise 
their respective religions with equal freedom and without mutual 
interference. Though Jainism has been steadily losing ground it 
has not altogether disappeared from the country— particularly in 
parts of Gujarat. 

The contact of South India with Islam is much older than that 
of the North. A Muslim fleet first sailed in Indian waters in 636, 
when a governor serving under Caliph Umar sent an army to 
Thana; but Umar disapproved of this. Very soon afterwards, 
Muslim traders continuing the contacts of pre-Muslim days settled 
in numerous parts of the Malabar coast, married the women of 
the country, and the issue of such unions became the Mappillas 
(Moplahs). Such Muslim traders were encouraged by Hindu 
Rajas who used them to procure horses for their cavalry and for 
manning their fleets. Al-Ishtakhri, an Arab writer of the tenth 
century who knew India at first hand, says that there were Musal- 
mans and JummaMasjids in the cities of the Rashtrakuta empire. 
A doubtful legend relates the conversion to Islam of the last of the 
Perumal rulers of Kerala, Cheraman Perumal. He is said to have 
made the pilgrimage to Mecca and to have sent directions from 
there to the rulers of his homeland to receive Muslims hospitably 
and to build mosques for them. Travellers like MasudI (916) and 
Ibn Batuta (fourteenth century) testify to the presence of Muslims 
and mosques all along the west coast. There were Muslim 
settlements on the east coast alko, of which Kayal-pattanam and 
Nagore were the most important. Islam, it is said, was preached 
actively near Trichinopoly early in the eleventh century by a 
Sayyid prince of Turkey, Nathad Vali, who became a missionary, 
came to India, and spent his last years converting many Hindus. 
His tomb is still pointed out in the city. According to Ibn Batuta, 
the army of Hoysala Ballala III included 20,000 Musalmans. 
The Muslim invasions from the North and their consequences, 
the rise of the Bahmanl kingdom and its relations with Vijayanagar, 
have been dealt with elsewhere. By the beginning of the sixteenth 
century the Mappillas were estimated by Duarte Barbosa to have 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 421 

formed one-fifth of the populaton of Malabar, but the arrival of 
the Portuguese checked the growth of Muslim power and ruined 
the Arab trade. 

It is very difficult to say how far Islam influenced Hindu 
religious thought and practice in the South. Some traits of the 
Hindu revival, such as the increasing emphasis on monotheism, 
on emotional worship, on self-surrender, on the need for devotion 
to a spiritual teacher, as well as the growing laxity in caste rules and 
indifference to ritual at least among some sects, have all been held 
to be in some way or other the result of Islamic influence. But 
these developments may well be explained from the internal 
history of Hinduism itself, and there is no direct evidence of the 
active influence of Islam on their growth. Perhaps after all it is 
not an accident that, as Eliot has observed, sects grew ‘more definite 
in doctrine and organization, especially among Vishnuites, as 
Hindus became more familiar with Islam’. As we have shown, 
however, there were Musalmans in plenty who, in general, were 
left free both to worship and to proselytize. 


A persistent but doubtful tradition ascribes the introduction 
of Christianity in South India to St Thomas, in the first century 
a.d. Cosmas, the Alexandrian merchant who travelled in South 
India in 522, found a church at Quilon and another in Ceylon, 
both Nestorian. Copper-plate grants to Malabar Christians, the 
earliest of which is dated 774, show that they had then gathered 
native converts, though they were not yet very numerous. The 
strength of the community was increased by a number of immigra- 
tions of Christians from western* countries, from Baghdad, 
Nineveh, Jerusalem and other places. 

There was a Christian community in Mylapore at St Thomas 
Mount, but no authentic evidence of its condition is forthcoming 
before Marco Polo (1293) who first reports the story of the martyr- 
dom of St Thomas on the Mount, but the shrine on the Greater 
Mount was visited by Hindus and Muslims as well as by the Christ- 
ians themselves. Thirty years after Marco Polo heard the story 
of St Thomas, Friar Odoric found some fifteen houses of Nestorians 
beside the church, but the church itself was filled with idols. 
A century later Conti reckoned a thousand Nestorians in the city; 



422 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

yet early in the sixteenth century Barbosa found the church in 

ruins with a Muslim jakir charged to keep a lamp in it. 

Christian travellers in the Middle Ages occasionally complain 
of the fewness of Christians in South India and of the persecution 
to which they were sometimes subjected, and Friar Jordanus(i32i- 
30) wrote enthusiastically of the great scope that India offered for 
missionary activity in the cause of Christianity. 

Active propagation of Christianity, however, began only after 
the arrival of the Portuguese and of St Francis Xavier (c. 1 545)- 
But these efforts did not make much headway except among the 
lower classes, and what is more, they led to the rise of acute schisms 
and quarrels between the new Catholic Christians and the other 
sects that had already established themselves in different parts of 
the country. The coming of other Christian nations like the 
Dutch only added to the confusion. We have already seen that the 
Portuguese policy of turning religious propaganda to political use 
roused the resentment of even the tolerant rulers of Vijayanagar and 
their feudatories. 

It cannot be said that in the period covered by this book 
Christianity exerted any potent influence on the life of the people 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

R. G. Bhandarkar : Vaishnavism, Saimsm and Minor Religious Systems 
(Strassburg, 1913) 

]. N. Farquhar : An Outline 0} tlie Religious Literature of India (London, 
1920) 

SIR Charles Eliot: Hinduism and Buddhism, 3 voU. (London, 1921) 

Estlin Carpenter: Theism in Medieval India (London, 1921) 

Tara Chand : Influence of Islam or^Indian Culture (Allahabad, 1936) 



ART AND ARCHITECTURE 



This brief sketch of the architecture and art of South India is 
more historical than aesthetic; aesthetic appreciation is a matter 
of individual taste, and the role of the art critic is different from 
that of the student of its history. Again, though the continuity 
in the evolution of art forms and the mutual influences of the differ- 
ent schools that flourished in different localities and ages will be 
taken account of in a general way, no attempt can be nude here to 
study such questions in any detail. Our aim must be to give a 
general view of the salient features of the different schools and their 
productions in the light of the most recent studies on the subject. 

The earliest monuments that call for notice are the caityas and 
viharas of the north-western Deccan. These are often called caves 
and ‘cave-temples’; such names are misleading when applied to 
these wonderful excavations, many of which are large, well-planne 
temples and monasteries skilfully chiselled out of the solid rock 
with infinite forethought and patience. The term rock-architec- 
ture’ has been suggested as more adequate by Percy Brown (to 
whose great work on Indian Architecture this account is much 
indebted). 



424 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Such work involved no great problems of constructional en- 
gineering, and is best regarded as a branch of sculpture, though 
‘on a grand and magnificent scale’. The caitya was primarily 
a temple or place of worship, and was so called because in early 
Buddhism the object of worship was generally a stupa ( caitya ); 
the vihara was a monastery. In Hinayana Buddhism the Buddha 
was never represented in sculptured form, but his presence was 
indicated by a throne, a footstool, cushions and other symbols. 
The Buddha image came into use in later Mahayana Buddhism, 
and then it was introduced into some of the early caityas as at 
Kanheri and Nasik. The Hinayana rock-cut monasteries and 
shrines are all situated in Bombay State within a radius of two 
hundred miles round Nasik. The caitya was generally ‘a large 
vaulted hall having an apsidal end and divided longitudinally 
by two colonnades into a broad nave and two aisles. In the apse 
stood the stupa, also carved out of the natural rock.’ Circumam- 
bulation of the stupa took place along the aisles and the apse, while 
the congregation assembled in the nave. The vihara consisted of a 
‘central hall entered by a doorway* from a verandah in front and 
surrounded by square cells cut further into the rock, each serving as 
the abode of a monk. Architecturally the caityas are more notable 
than the viharas. In both there was a close imitation of the wooden 
structures which were the originals of their designs; even in rock- 
cut buildings, much woodwork was put into both the facade and 
interior, so used were the early builders to wood before they started 
building in stone. But rock-architecture as it comes before us is 
fully matured, and the stages, if any, of its evolution are no longer 
traceable. 

There are eight caitya halls of the second and first century B.c. 
and in their probable order of execution they are ‘Bhaja, Kon- 
dane, Pitalkhora, Ajanta (No. io), Bedsa, Ajanta (No. 9), Nasik and 
Karle’, the first four belonging to the second century and the re- 
mainder to the first. Two caitya halls at Junnar are ‘of the same 
type and date as that at Nasik’. The series may be said to close 
with the caitya at Kanheri (second century A.D.). In the earlier 
examples the pillars of the colonnades are copies of plain wooden 
posts, with an octagonal section and without capital or base, and 
they generally slope towards the interior; in later examples the in- 
ward slant disappears and the columns become more elaborate, with 
bases and capitals, and evolve into an ‘order’. The horse-shoe 



as the column is marked by many innovations. At Bedsa the 
base of the column is vase-shaped and its capital is surmounted by 
a group of figures and animals ‘each of which consists of a male and 
female figure lightly clad but with heavy ornaments seated astride 
kneeling animals, on the one side horses, and on the other elephants. 
These groups are exceptionally vivid and spirited examples of 
rock sculpture, evidently the work of a master craftsman in this 
medium.’ The hall is 45 i feet long and 21 feet wide. Karle(Pl. I), 
the largest and best of the series, is 124 feet long, 46 J feet wide and 
45 feet high. Here the fa?ade consists of two stages, the lower 
wall pierced by three doorways and an upper gallery over which 
rises the enormous horse-shoe window. The pillars of the colon- 
nade have capitals more elaborate than at Bedsa, and they have 
the effect of a frieze and cornice. From them rise the wooden 
ribs attached to the domed stone of the roof. The spaces between 
the doorways in the lower stage of the faipade are each decorated 
with sculptures of two human figures, very massive and grandly 
executed. ‘The setting back of the entrance into the face of the 
rock forms an outer porch, the sides of which are sculptured in 
architectural facades of several storeys, the lowest supported by 
huge elephants, the second decorated with sculptured figures’ like 
those of the lower stage of the facade. The entrance was preceded 
by a wooden antechamber or porch, and farther outside stands one 
of the two original monolithic dhvajastambhas with a capital of 
four lions which once supported a wheel. The arrangements 
carefully designed to deflect the glaring sunshine streaming through 
the horse-shoe window of the facade have received high praise 
from Percy Brown who observes: ‘There are few lighting effects 

more solemnly beautiful than the soft luminous atmosphere 
diffused in this manner through the sun-window at Karle’. The 
caitya at Kanheri is ‘a decadent copy of that at Karle, but only 
about two-thirds its size’. 

The viharas are monastic houses excavated near the caityas 
in secluded places where the monks found freedom to pursue their 
religious observances without distraction. From a small beginning 
in course of time they developed a full complement of rooms : a 
dormitory, a common room, a refectory, and so on, besides cells 





426 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

for individual monks. Ajanta (No. 12) is ‘a simple but typical 
example’ of an early single-storeyed vihara. Another vihara 
of the same type is that to the left of the caitya at Kondane. At 
Nasik this type of vihara is seen ‘in its most decorative form . . . 
in a series of three examples*, all of the first century a.d., viz. 
Nahapana (No. 8), Gautamlputra and Sriyajna, so-called from 
their inscriptions. ‘All have columned porticos’ but no pillars 
in their large central halls, from which open the individual cells 
generally containing stone beds. 

Contemporary with these monasteries in the Western Ghats, 
another group— not Buddhist but Jaina— was excavated near 
Cuttack in Orissa. These rock-cut chambers are all located in 
two hills known as Khandagiri and Udayagiri, and were made within 
the century and a half preceding the Christian era. There are 
in all some thirty-five excavations but only half the number are at 
all important, only one of these being on Khandagiri. There 
was apparently no regular plan and they were cut in convenient 
places and connected by paths. The workmanship is clumsy and 
crude, but that was perhaps at least in part due to the rough texture 
of the sandstone. Locally, these monasteries are known as 
gumphas , and each is distinguished by some prefix, like Hathi 
(elephant). There are many unidentified sculptured scenes from 
Jaina legends in the more important gumphas. The style of the 
sculptures is at once original and vigorous. The Rani and 
GaneSa gumphas are both two-storeyed; and the courtyard of the 
Rani, there is good reason to think, constituted an open-air theatre. 
In it are the remains of channels for the distribution of water 
throughout the structure. In the Ganeia gumpha the entrance 
steps are flanked with figures of elephants, the first appearance 
of the sculptured-animal motif at the entrance to a rock-cut hall 
which was developed with such wonderful effect later at EUora and 
Elephanta (where, however, the elephants are replaced by lions). 

Remains of extensive Buddhist sanctuaries, rock-cut and struc- 
tural, are found on many sites in the lower reaches of the Krishna 
and Godavari rivers. Nearly all of them bear traces of an early 
foundation, for in this region Buddhist art found a refuge under the 
patronage of the Andhras and their successors and had a more or 
less continuous evolution from about 200 B.c. to a.d. 400. The 
monuments of this region form a precious link between the ancient 
schools of Barhut and Sanchi and medieval Hindu art. Rock-cut 




ART AND ARCHITECTURE 


427 


architecture is found in two sites in Andhra state, one at Guntupalli 
(Krishna district), the other on the Sankaram hills (Vizagapatam 
district). The small circular caitya of Guntupalli (200 B.C.), 
18 feet in diameter, and its ribbed domical roof are obvious imita- 
tions of a primitive hut, and the whole structure, perhaps, contains 
the clue to the beginnings of the more elaborate cailya hall. 
There are, besides, two vihdras , one large and the other small, 
ruins of a brick-built caitya hall, and several stupas of various sizes, 
rock-cut and structural. There is no regular plan and the work is 
rather coarse. The remains on the Sankaram hills are perhaps 
later — about a.d. 350. A number of monolithic stupas and rock- 
cut chambers scattered in an irregular way to suit the configuration 
of the hilltop and the foundations of an extensive structural 
monastery are the principal remains. Some of the monolithic 
stupas here are the largest of their kind, one being 65 feet in dia- 
meter at the base. Here, as at Guntupalli, the work is rather 
crude and unskilled. 

The technical skill and artistic excellence of the Andhra 
craftsman are best seen in the structural monuments, particularly 
the stupas distributed over an area of 75 miles all round Ellore. 
The most notable of them were at Goli, Jaggeyapeta, Bhattiprolu, 
Ghantsala, Amaravati and Nagarjunikonda. As examples of 
Buddhist architecture and sculpture they had few equals at the 
beginning of the Christian era. Most of them had an exterior 
encasement of white marble, richly carved in low relief, and this 
gave them an imposing appearance. In the early examples, as at 
Bhattiprolu, the stupa was built solid, but later strength and economy 
of material were secured by means of cross-walls and ‘other walls 
radiating towards the circumference like the spokes of a wheel’. 
The bricks themselves were of enormous size, 24" X 18 x 4 . 
At first, the stupa was a low hemispherical mound, as at Sanchi, 
but in later examples the dome is raised by being set on a lofty 
plinth. The marble casing was never applied over the whole 
surface of the brick core, but only to its lower portion, the re- 
mainder being plastered and painted white. At the four cardinal 
points there were rectangular projections from the plinth which 
accommodated steps leading to the procession-path above the 
plinth. Above each of these projections stood five slender pillars 
which may have symbolized the five Dhyanibuddhas and were call- 
ed dry aka kambhas (‘worshipful columns’). ‘As an ornamental 



428 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

attribution to the domical shape of the stupa, this projection 
with its graceful pillars was an admirable device and gives an 
artistic distinction to the southern type.’ 








ART AND ARCHITECTURE 429 

At Ter in the Sholapur district and Chezarla in the Krishna 
district are found Buddhist caitya halls built in brick, perhaps in 
the fifth century A.D., and surviving to this day because they were 
appropriated to brahminical uses after the decline of Buddhism. 
We refer to the Trivikrama temple at Ter and the Kapotesvara 
temple at Chezarla. These two small buildings, each not more 
than 30 feet long, are now the only means of judging the external 
appearance of the Buddhist structural temples as the rock-cut 
caityas have no exteriors except their fayades. 

About the middle of the fifth century there was a revival of 
rock-architecture in the western Deccan under the stimulus of 
Mahayana Buddhism. The chief centres of this art were Ajanta, 
EUora and Aurangabad, not to speak of some places of lesser 
importance in the same region. The caitya in its essential features 
remained the same as before except for the introduction of Buddha 
images, sometimes of colossal proportions. The vihara, however, 
undergoes much alteration and the innermost range of cells which 
served originally as dormitories for monks now became sanctuaries 
containing images of the Buddha. And the vihara thus became a 
place of worship as well as of residence. 

The monastic retreats of Ajanta extend in a ‘sickle-shaped 
curve along the face of the cliff for over a third of a mile, and over- 
hanging the waters of a pretty stream, cascading through the ravine 
below’. Here are twenty-eight halls of various sizes and they have 
been numbered in order from west to east. Two caityas and three 
vihdras (Nos. 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13) had come into existence in the 
earlier Hinayana period under the Andhras (200 B.C.— A.D. 200); 
the others were added in the two centuries that followed a.d. 450. 
In these later examples the imitation of wooden construction is 
discarded, and a distinct advance made in the handling of the 
rock-medium. The walls and the ceilings of these halls were 
covered with a large number of mural frescoes which have survived 
in some of them almost intact. 

The two vihdras (Nos. 16 and 17) made under the Vakatakas 
(about a.d. 500) are pillared halls with the usual cells and shrines 
in the back walls containing Buddhas seated in ‘European fashion’ 
(pralamba pada). In the paintings of No. 16, there is a remarkable 
combination of figures with architectural motifs; while a striking 
narrative style marks the scenes of the life of the Buddha depicted 
inNo. 17. No. 19 (PI. Ill), withits highly embellished facade and its 




430 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

numerous Buddhas, marking a great development of Mahayana 
sculpture, may be dated about 550, thus forming a link between 
the earlier group and that of the seventh century. The pillars 
within this caitya are fluted columns richly ornamented. The 
capitals are of the pot and foliage variety. The chief painting here 
is the ‘Return to Kapilavastu’. Nos. 1-5 and 21-6 were the last 
group to come into existence ( c . 600-50). No. 1 contains the 
painting of the beautiful ‘Bodhisattva with blue lotus’ and other 
famous frescoes including the ‘Sibi-Jataka’ and ‘Banquet of Persi- 
ans’, really a representation of the Buddhist god Pancika. The 
painters of Ajanta ‘had a complete command of posture. Their 
knowledge of the types and positions, gestures and beauties of 
hands is amazing. Many racial types are rendered; the features 
are often elaborately studied and of high-breeding, and one might 
call it stylistic-breeding. In some pictures considerable impetus 
of movement of different kinds is well suggested. Some of the 
schemes of colour composition are most remarkable and interesting 
and there is great variety.’ A critic observes: ‘It is impossible 
for anyone who has not seen them with their own eyes to realize 
how great and solid the paintings in the caves are; how wonderful 
in their simplicity and religious fervour.’ But the simplicity was 
the result of a very conscious art-tradition of long standing and, 
as Grousset has said, ‘every one of the chief subjects of the Ajanta 
frescoes is worthy of separate analysis’. The Ajanta style of paint- 
ing is seen contemporaneously at Sigiriya in Ceylon and some 
centuries later in the paintings of a Jaina cave at SittannaviHal 
(Pudukkottai), in the cave-temple at Tirumalaipuram (Tinnevelly 
district), and on the inner walls of the garbhagriha of the Great 
Temple at Tanjore. 

The rock-architecture of Ellora was begun by the Buddhists 
from 450 to 650, with twelve rock-cut halls that fall into two sub- 
groups, one slightly later than the other and each comprising a 
prayer-hall with monasteries attached to it. The later group 
contains two monasteries which are the only examples in three 
storeys, rising to a height of nearly 50 feet with wide courtyards in 
front. The technique of rock-architecture reached its culmination 
in some of these viharas in which ‘lines are straighter, angles more 
correct, and surfaces more true than in any other examples’. 
At Aurangabad there are three groups of Buddhist excavations in 
a hill about a mile north of the city. One of them includes a 




devotees, male and female, in these viharas are remarkable for 
their massive proportions and bold relief and for their life-like 
presentation of the people of the period, their garments, head- 
dresses and ornaments. 

The beginnings of Hindu temple architecture in South India 
are best traced in the temple-complex at Aihole and its neighbour- 
hood dating from a.d. 450 to 650. Aihole is a town of temples 
and contains no fewer than seventy structures. The work started 
there was continued in the neighbouring towns of Badami and 
Pattadakal. The temple at Aihole known as Ladh Khan, usually 
assigned to about 450, is a low flat-roofed building 50 feet square, 
with a small square cella and a porch set on the roof at a later date 
and forming an independent shrine of the Sun. Of the main temple 
three sides are completely enclosed by walls, two of which 
carry stone windows perforated in a variety of beautiful designs. 
On the fourth side, which forms the eastern front, there is an open 
porch on the pillars of which are figures of the river-goddesses. 
The interior is a pillared hall containing ‘two square groups of 
columns one within the other’. A large nandi fills the central 
bay, and the cella at the farther end is not a separate chamber 
leading off from the main hall, as one would expect, but built 
within it against the back wall. The entire disposition is totally 
inadequate for the purposes of a temple, and Percy Brown suggests 
that it was just a mote-hall converted into a temple. In the 
pilasters at the exterior angles of the building may be traced the 
beginnings of the ‘Dravidian order’ with the tapering upper end of 
the column and its ‘cushion capital with an expanded floral abacus 
supporting the bracket’. The construction of the roof is also 
peculiar as it consists of large flat slabs held together by long narrow 
stones covering the entire length of the joints and fitting into 
grooves cut in the slabs. 

Very different from Ladh Khan is the Durga temple (PI. IV), 
which was another experiment seeking to adapt the Buddhist caitya 
to a brahminical temple. This temple, perhaps of the sixth century, 
is an apsidal structure (60 feet by 36 feet) with a large portico 24 
feet deep on its eastern front making its entire length 84 feet. The 
temple stands on a high plinth with many mouldings. The top 



432 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

of its flat roof is 30 feet from the ground. A sihhara rises above 
the garbhagriha in the apse and there is a verandah roofed with 
sloping slabs carried on massive square columns with heavy 
brackets and this forms the pradakshina path. 

The sihhara or pyramidal tower over the sanctum is generally 
curvilinear in shape in Northern India, but in the far South it 
rises by square terraces of diminishing size. In the Deccan both 
styles were used. There was even a tendency, at times, to combine 
the features of the two styles. The sihhara of the Durga temple, 
perhaps a later addition, is of the Northern variety. 

Another temple very similar to the Durga temple is the smaller 
and simpler Huccimalli-gudi which contains one new feature, 
namely a vestibule or antarala between the cella and the main hall. 
One of the last temples to be built at Aihole was the Jaina temple of 
Meguti (634), which shows considerable progress in the erection of 
structural temples. It is unfinished and its shrine is detached 
from the back wall. Of nearly the same date is the small finely- 
proportioned and magnificently located Malagitti Sivalaya at 
Badami. 

A group of four pillared rock-cut halls at Badami, three of 
them Hindu and one Jaina, are all of the same type, each com- 
prising ‘a pillared verandah, a columned hall, and a small square 
cella cut deep into the rock’. One of these (No. 3) is a Vaishnava 
cave exactly dated 578, and contains fine reliefs of Vishnu seated on 
Ananta and a Narasimha, both in the verandah. The workman- 
ship in these caves is marked by a high degree of technical excell- 
ence. One noteworthy feature is the running frieze of ganas 
in various amusing postures carved in relief on each plinth. 
The front of these caves is otherwise unassuming but the interior 
is treated with great skill and care in every detail. 

The next stage in the development of Chalukyan art is marked 
by the temples at Pattadakal, about ten miles from Badami. There 
are ten temples here, four in the Northern style and six in the 
Southern. The Papanatha temple (c. 680) among the former, and 
Sangamesvar (c. 725) and Virupaksha (c. 740) among the latter, are 
the most notable. The temple of Papanatha (PI. V, above) in its 
plan and elevation alike exhibits shortcomings due to uncertainty 
regarding the correct relation of the different parts of the temple 
structure to one another. The temple is 90 feet long and too low 
for its length, its tower in true Northern style is too small and 







ART AND ARCHITECTURE 433 

stunted, and the antardla too big — almost a supplementary hall. 
The outer walls carry a close and monotonous repetition of cano- 
pied niches representing a shrine. This temple was perhaps one 
of the first attempts to combine Northern and Southern features in 
one structure, and was not quite successful. 

The vastly improved design and execution of the Virupaksha 
temple (Plate V, below), built by one of Vikramaditya II’s queens, 
was most likely due to workmen brought from Kanchlpuram, and 
to their direct imitation of the Kailasanatha temple which had come 
into existence in the Pallava capital some decades earlier. ‘There is 
a bold beauty’, says Brown, ‘in the appearance of the Virupaksha 
temple as a whole, which is best seen in the exterior. It is a 
comprehensive scheme as it consists not only of the central struc- 
ture, but of a detached nandi pavilion in front, and it is contained 
within a walled enclosure entered by an appropriate gateway.’ 
It measures 120 feet from the front of the porch to the back of the 
shrine, and the studied grouping of its parts produces a very 
pleasant total effect. The heaviness of the stonework is relieved 
by an increase in the amount and quality of the sculpture. The 
main shrine, distinct from the mandapa, has a pradakshina passage. 
The pillared mandapa has thick walls with perforated stone windows. 
The square Hkhara rises in clearly defined storeys each of consider- 
able elevation. The external wall surface is divided by pilasters 
into well spaced ornamental niches filled alternately with windows 
and sculptures. The sculptures include representations of Siva, 
nagas and naginis, and scenes from the Rdmayana. To cite Brown 
once more: ‘The sculpture flows into the architecture in a continu- 
ous yet disciplined stream. . . . The Virupaksha temple is one of 
those rare buildings of the past in which the spirit still lingers of 
the men who conceived it and wrought it with their hands.’ 
The neighbouring Sangame^vara temple, built some years earlier, 
is very much in the same style but has an open mandapa. 

Progress in the erection of structural temples did not mean 
the cessation of rock-architecture, which continued to flourish 
to the end of the ninth century. Its final manifestation occurred 
in three localities, namely: EUora, already in the occupation of 
Buddhists for over 200 years; the islands of Elephanta and Salsette 
near Bombay; and the Pallava kingdom in the far South. At 
Ellora, the brahminical group (spread over half a mile along the 
west face of the hill) contains sixteen temples. They fall into 













A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 
it type, a complete monolithic structural temple, 


The last tvpe, a complete inoiiuuum. 3UUVIU1 “‘ r 
represented by the unique example of Kailasa at Ellora (PI. y 111 )- 
excavated under Rashtrakuta Krishna I. In its general plan, it 
bears a certain resemblance to the Virupaksha temple at Pattadakal 
though it is more than twice its size. The temple resolves itself 
into four parts-its main body, the entrance gateway, a nandt 
shrine in between, and cloisters round the courtyard. Supple- 
mentary chambers, probably of a slightly later date, have been cut 
on the sides of the courtyard, that in the north wall called the 
Lankesvara being a large, pillared hall. The entrance to the 










a regular fresco in stone. This relief is a masterpiece of classic 
art in the breadth of its composition, the sincerity of its impulse 
which draws all creatures together round the beneficent waters, 
and its deep, fresh love of nature.’ 1 A small shrine immediately 
to the left of the cascade contains the standing figure of Siva. 
Before this temple is bowed the emaciated figure of Bhagiratha 
who is represented also above practising tapas with upraised arms. 
Among the sculptured animals, the monumental elephants on 
the right and the ascetic cat imitating the posture of Bhagiratha s 
penance with trustful mice playing at its feet are particularly 
noteworthy, as also the pair of deer which look on the scene from 
the mouth of a cave opposite, on the left hand side, with the lifelike 
action of the stag scratching his nose with h.s hind foot More 
amazing still in its masterly realism is the detached family ot 
monkeys sculptured in the round ‘with the male picking vermin 
off the female while she suckles her two little ones i . 

There are all together ten mandapas of the Mahamalla stvle 
on various sites on the main hill at Mamallapuram. All of them 
exhibit much progress from the simple style of the Mahendra 
caves though they stiff retain more or less the same general charac- 
ter and proportions as before. None of them is a large structure. 
Generally speaking the dimensions are: facade, 25 feet wide, 15 20 
feet high, depth (including cella) 25 feet; pillars, 9 feet high, 
sides 1-2 feet at their widest; cellas, rectangular, each side 5-10 
feet. The pillars are the main features. The roll cornice above 
them in front is decorated with kudus. Above the cornice is a 
parapet formed of miniature shrines alternately long and short. 




through a pillared portico on its long side. The oblong plan, 
diminishing storeys and barrel roofs with pinnacles (kalasas) 
and gable ends of these rathas may well have suggested the design 
for the later gopuras, or entrance towers of temples. All these 
rathas were most probably Saiva in character and the figure sculp- 
ture on all of them is of the same high quality as in the mandapas. 
Men and gods are sculptured in the most graceful forms, and the 
animal sculpture is superb. Deities have four arms, dvarapalas 
only two For some unknown reason work on these monoliths 
was left incomplete, and we enter on the second phase of Pallava 
architecture marked entirely by structural temples in stone. 

These structural temples again fall into two groups the 
Rajasimha group (c. 700-800), and the Nandivarman group 
(800-900). There are six examples of the former: three at Ma- 
mallapuram (the Shore, Uvara and Mukunda temples) : one at 
Panamalai (South Arcot district), and the temples of Kailasanatha 
and V aikunthaperumal at Kanchipuram. The earliest of them was 
doubtless the Shore temple(Pl.X, below). Its excellent workmanship 
is proved by its having withstood, in a very exposed position, the 
action of wind and sea and the shifting sands of the shore The 
plan of the temple is somewhat unusual. Its cella faces the sea 
and is located almost at the water’s edge. The usual adjuncts to 
the temple had therefore to be accommodated in its rear. A 
massive enclosing wall surrounds the central building and entry 
into the open courtyard is obtained from the west. Two additional 
shrines were attached as an afterthought to the western end of the 


442 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

main shrine one of which has a smaUer vimdna and presents the 
appearance at first sight of being the main entrance. These addi- 
tions go far to account for the unusual, though by no means un- 
pleasing, appearance of the Shore temple with its two vimanas. 
Clearly the buildings in this temple are a logical development from 
the Dharmaraja ratha, allowance being made for the change from 
the rock-cut to the structural technique. At the same time there 
is a marked attempt, particularly in the treatment of the ■mmdnas, 
to leave the idea of the vihdra behind and evolve a lighter and more 
rhythmic tower. The lion motif, particularly, in the pilasters 
becomes more developed, and in the Shore temple, as Brown 
remarks, ‘this heraldic lion, erect and holding up a Dravidian 
capital, projects from every angle, and is also introduced at 
intervals around the lower part of the entire building’. The 
outer enclosure contained a system of shallow cisterns holding 
water brought by conduits, any overflow being led into the sea. 
The parapet of the imposing surrounding wall was crowned by 
figures of couchant bulls and all round the exterior there were 
boldly carved lion pilasters at close intervals. The richly orna- 
mented doorway on the west led into a mandapa of which only the 
foundations remain. 

Not longafterthe Shoretemple came the KailasanathaatKanchl- 
puram (PI. XI, above), built mostly in the reign of Rajasimha though 
the actual completion of the structure took place in the reign of his 
son Mahendravarman. In its original form, the temple consisted 
of a sanctuary with its pyramidal vimdna and a detached pillared 
hall or mandapa in front, the whole enclosed in a rectangular court- 
yard by a high wall composed of cells. The mandapa and the 
sanctuary were joined together centuries later by an intermediate 
ardhamandapa which has spoiled the total effect. The sanctum 
and the vimdna conform to the type of the Dharmaraja ratha 
except for the subsidiary shrines. These are seven in number, 
one at each angle of the sanctum and one in the middle of each free 








{ OF SOUTH INDIA 

;longs the credit of having kept up and 


developed the traditions of Amaravati and transmitted 
lands beyond the seas where in course of time there : 
monuments which threw even the splendid achievements of the 


mother country into the shade. 

The Cholas were the inheritors and continuers of the Pallava 


traditions in temple construction. They built numberless stone 
temples throughout their kingdom, but to the end of the tenth 
century the buildings were not very large. Unlike the great 
imperial designs of the early eleventh century, they imply limited 
resources and local developments. The district of Pudukkottai 


contains an unusually large number of early Chola monuments, 
in a good state of preservation, which give a very good idea of the 
stages by which later Pallava architecture grew into the Chola style 
proper. Among them, the Vijayalaya-Cholesvara at Narttamalai 
(PI. XII) has the first claim on our attention. This temple 
was most likely built in the time of Vijayalaya, the first Chola ruler 
of the period. It faces west, and is one of the finest examples of the 
early Chola style. It has the unusual arrangement of a circular 
cella within a square prdkdra. Above the cella and prdkara rises 
the vimdna in four diminishing storeys of which the three lower 
ones are square and the uppermost circular, the whole surmounted 
by a dome-shaped iikhara with a round kalasa on top. There is an 
enclosed mandapa in front. The external walls are adorned with 
ornamental pilasters with characteristic features of the Chola 
‘order’. There are no niches in the walls and a frieze of bhutas is 
carved below the curved comice at the top, the comice itself being 
decorated at intervals with kudus containing human heads or ani- 
mal figures, while at the comer the decoration takes the form of very 
pleasing scroll work. Above the cornice is another frieze of lions 
(vyalas), changing at the corners into the form of a makara head. 
The parapet over the ceiling carries miniature shrines {panjarams), 
which are square in plan at the comers and rectangular elsewhere. 
The panjarams are also repeated in the lower storeys of the vimdna. 
The pillars in the mandapa in front are still of the Pallava style, 
square at the base and top and octagonal in the middle. The 
corbels carrying the roll ornamentation have a slightly raised, 
plain, medium band. Over the main entrance is an elegantly 
carved floral design, and on either side of it are two dvarapdlas 
inside niches 5 feet high facing forwards, but with their bodies 


ART AND ARCHITECTURE 


445 


half-turned towards the entrance, one leg crossed over the other. 
They have only two arms, as in Pallava monuments. Round the 
main temple in an open yard are seven small sub-shrines, all 
facing inwards, all built of stone and resembling the main temple 
in essential features. This arrangement of seven or eight sub- 
shrines round the main temple was typical of the early Chola 
period. The Balasubrahmanya temple of Kannanur (Pudukkottai), 
built in the reign of Aditya I, is another temple in the same style 
in which, however, elephants take the place of nandis at the four 
comers of the roof of the shrine and below the sikhara in the 
vitnana, the elephant being the vehicle of Subrahmanya. 

The beautiful little temple of Nagesvara at Kumbakonam is 
more or less of the same period and style, but its most remarkable 
feature is the sculptures found in the niches on its outer walls. 
The central niche on each side of the cella enshrines the usual deity 
— Ardhanar! on the west, Brahma on the north, Dakshinamurti 











latory passage 9 feet wide around it. The inner walls of this passage 
contain fine frescoes coeval with the temple (Frontispiece) but 
overlaid by later tempera work of the Nayak rulers of Tanjore. The 
cella enshrines an enormous lingam originally called RajarajeSvara 
and now known as Brihadisvara. Its height with its pedestal 
occupies the space of both the storeys. In front of the cella is a 
transept reached by flights of steps on the south and north, and 
the walls of the garbhagriha and ardhamandapa on either 
side are adorned with pilasters and large niches, the same as 
the outer walls of the shrine. The entrance to the shrine-chamber 
is guarded by two large dvarapalas in niches. The roof of the 
transept is supported by two rows of four piers each In front of 
the transept is the ardhamandapa (also a two-storeyed structure) on 
the same plinth with the same type of pilasters and niches. Then 
comes the mahamandapa with rows of pillars along the middle and 
aisles on either side. In front of the mahamandapa is another 
transept reached by flights of steps on the north and south. 





450 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

The relatively small mandapa added to this with another flight of 
steps in front is a very late accretion. Some yards away in 
front is the nandimandapa containing one of the largest monolithic 
bulls known in South India. The outer walls of the ardhamandapa 
contain niches carrying sculptures of gods and goddesses of con- 
siderable iconographic and artistic interest. The whole temple 
from the heavily moulded parts of its high basement to its finial 
is a magnificent example of solidity combined with proportion and 
grace of form. 

The temple of Gangaikondaiolapuram, the creation of Rajaraja’s 
son Rajendra, was evidently meant to excel its predecessor in 
every way. The town which once surrounded it, as also the large 
lake of fresh water that once adorned the neighbourhood of the 
Chola capital, have now disappeared, and this fine temple therefore 
stands in the solitude of the wilderness except for the mud huts of a 
small village nearby. Erected about 1030, only two decades after 
the temple of Tanjore and in much the same style, the greater 
elaboration in its appearance attests the more affluent state of the 
Chola empire under Rajendra. It is larger in plan though not so 
tall, the vimana being too feet square at the base and 186 feet 
high. The temple, which forms a large rectangle 340 feet long 
and 1 10 feet wide, occupies the middle of an immense walled enclos- 
ure partly designed for defensive purposes, as may be seen from a 
substantial bastion at the south-east angle and a smaller one on 
the west. Its main entrance is on the east, next to which is the 
mahamandapa, a rather low building 175 feet by 95 feet with over 
150 pillars of ordinary design. These pillars are arranged in colon- 
nades on a solid platform 4 feet high which is divided by a wide 
passage or aisle down the centre while a narrower passage on the 
same level is carried round the hall. Between the mahamandapa 
and the sanctuary is a transept with doorways to the north and south, 
‘both deeply recessed side entrances approached from outside by 
flights of steps’. As in Tanjore, there are in the transept two 
rows of massive square piers, eight in all. 

The vimana has the same construction as in Tanjore but the 
number of tiers making up the pyramidal body is only eight as 
against thirteen in Tanjore. The most important difference lies 
in the introduction of curves in the place of the strong straight 
lines of the Tanjore vimana. The pyramidal body is slightly 
.concave in its outline at its angles while the sides are curved to 








at joy alike, or rather, if we may be allowed so to express it, his 
smile is both death and life, both joy and pain. . . . From this lofty 
point of view, in fact, all things fall into their place, finding their 
explanation and logical compulsion. Here art is the faithful 
interpreter of the philosophical concept. The plastic beauty 
of rhythm is no more than the expression of an ideal rhythm. The 
very multiplicity of arms, puzzling as it may seem at first sight, 
is subject in turn to an inward law, each pair remaining a model of 
elegance in itself, so that the whole being of the Nataraja thrills 
with a magnificent harmony in his terrible joy. And as though to 
stress the point that the dance of the divine actor is indeed a sport, 
(ft/d) — the sport of life and death, the sport of creation and destruc- 
tion, at once infinite and purposeless — the first of the left hands 
hangs limply from the arm in the careless gesture of the gajahasta 
(hand as the elephant’s trunk). And lastly as we look at the back 
view of the statue, are not the steadiness of these shoulders which 


uphold the world, and the majesty of this Jove-like torso, as it were 
a symbol of the stability and immutability of substance, while the 


In the latter class the sculpture is of a more florid character. The 
pillar also underwent a further evolution under the Pandyas: the 
idol became more pronounced with a scolloped edge, the corbel 
was moulded into a pendant or drop, and th epaagai ‘ncreased m 
width. Pandya architecture generally spent itself in embellishing 

existing temples by adding outer mandapas, additional sub-shnnes 

and gdpuras, rather than in building entire temples. One of the 
earljf examples of the Pandya gopura is that in thesecondenclosure 
wall of the temple of Jambukesvara on the island of fn^ngam a 
twelfth-century structure, still retaining many features of the 
Chola style. Later and more typical Pandya gopuras are the Sun- 
dara Pandya gopura also at Jambukesvara and the eastern gopura 
of the temple of Chidambaram, both mid-thirteenth 

effectby^m inCTea^of decorative deuflwhichmay be taken to mark 
the transition from the restrained maturity of Cho'a archheWure to 
■the exquisite though extravagant productions of Vyay anagar 
Mention must also be made of two Jaina monuments of parti- 
cular interest at gravana Belgola, both creations of Chamundaraya 
Sister of the Ganga king Racamal.a IV. Oneof^™'; 

» Grousset, India (English translation), pp. 252-3. 


454 A HISTORY OF SOOTH INDIA 

in its present form the structure is typical of Chola architecture of 
the early twelfth century. The other monument is the stupendous 
monolithic image of Gommata, son of the first Tlrthankara, rising 
to a height of 56 feet on the hill known as Indrabetta. This 
colossus, carved about 983, represents the ascetic standing entirely 
nude and absorbed in meditation with ant-hills rising at his feet 
and plants winding themselves about his limbs. Two similar but 
smaller statues, also monoliths, were made in Kanara, one over 
40 feet high at Karkala in 1432, and the other at Yenur, about 
35 feet high, in 1604. One feature common to Jaina temples of 
the South is the manastambha standing in front of the temple on a 
wide square base of several moulded steps. The column is gener- 
ally square in the lower part but becomes circular above and bears 
‘shallow flutes crossed by lateral bands at regular intervals’. 
The capital is generally a fluted vase supporting an elaborate 
superstructure carried on an abacus supported by figures of ram- 
pant gryphons. Some of these free-standing pillars are over 50 
feet in height and are in themselves impressive works of art. 

The temples built in the western Deccan under the Chalukyas 
of Kalyani developed features which received their most mature 
expression in the architecture of the Hoysala temples in Mysore. 
These temples often had their principal entrances not at the front 
but at the sides, and the decoration of their external walls with 
architectural motifs dividing the wall into well-proportioned areas 
tended to be singularly graceful and restrained, while their vimanas 
were a compromise between the plain, stepped storeys of the early 
Chalukyas and the closely moulded tiers of the Hoysala style. 
The pillars were turned on lathes and had a pronounced knife- 
edge very considerably projected below the capital. The door- 
ways, both at the outer entrance and of the shrine-chamber, were 
very elaborately carved with fine detail and finish. The Navalinga 
(Nine Lingas) and KalleSvara temples at Kukkanur near Gadag are 
perhaps the earliest examples of this style and possibly date from 
the close of the tenth century, though they still bear resemblances 
to the early Chalukyan group of Aihole and Pattadakal. From 
among the numerous other examples of this style spread over the 
entire area of the Chalukyan empire, the temples of Kasi-vi£ve4vara 
at Lakkundi, of Mahadeva at Ittagi and of Mallikatjuna at Kuru- 
vatti may be mentioned as the most typical. 

The builders of Hoysala temples invariably used a dark stone 




same. Above it, the broad space 
by the pillars and screens of the 








456 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

hall is adorned with ornate niches containing images of gods under 
foliated canopies, each one so elaborately chiselled (and often 
signed by the sculptor) as to constitute a more or less distinct work 
of art. The rich effect of all this statuary is enhanced by the star 
shape of the structure which produces vertical planes like facets 
and provides an abundant variety of light and shade. The Hkhara 
separated by the wide projecting cornice from the body of the 
temple below keeps the stellate formation, but its vertical lines are 
balanced by horizontal mouldings so that the whole tower appears 
as an orderly succession of diminishing tiers terminating in a low 
finial having the shape of a parasol at its apex. Miniature shrines 
and niches adorn each of these tiers. 

The shape of the pillar and its capital was another remarkable 
feature of this style. The shaft is a monolith fashioned into 
beautiful shapes by being turned on a lathe, the base being left 
square. A sloping bracket-stone was set above the capital, to 
which it was fixed by sockets. These brackets, also monolithic, 
carried carvings of fine images with leafy aureoles known as 
madanakai figures. Their high finish rivals that of the figures in the 
niches of the vimana. 

These Hoysala temples, though basically developments of the 
South Indian style, represent an art which applies to stone the 
technique of the ivory worker or the goldsmith. The wealth of 
jewellery borne by many of the figures, the variety ofhead-dresses 
and other details are well calculated to give a fair idea of the social 
life of the times. A very typical and complete example of the style is 
the Kegava temple at Somanathapur (PI. XIX), twenty miles from 
Seringapatam. It is a triple shrine in the shape of a cross, 87 feet 
by 83 feet, with only one entrance on the east, set within a rectangu- 
lar courtyard surrounded by sixty-four cells, the whole enclosure 
measuring 215 feet by 177 feet. ‘So well balanced and finely 
proportioned are its parts that no element obtrudes oris out of place, 
and although the three stellate towers are only 30 feet high they 
are fully in accord with the rest of the building.’ 

A larger and earlier example is furnished by a group of temples at 
Belur dating from about 1 1 17 of which the temple of ChennakeSava 
(PI. XX) is the centre. Its superstructure is now missing but clearly 
when complete it must have been a work of surpassing beauty. It 
has three entrances, one on each of the free sides of the pillared hall, 
‘approached by a flight of steps flanked by a pagoda-like shrine. 




of Ketamalla, chief officer of the public works. It is a double 
temple, two complete structures exactly alike built side by side 
and connected by their side transepts. Each measures 112 feet 
in length and about too feet in width. The infinite wealth of 
sculpture over the exterior of this temple makes it one of the most 
remarkable monuments of the world and an unrivalled repository 
of religious thought expressed in plastic form’. 

In the kingdom of Kalinga (Orissa) many temples were bu.lt 
from the ninth to the thirteenth century in the North Indian styk. 
BhuvaneSvar contains the main group, numbering over thirty. 
Within a few miles of it are two of the largest and most . mport ant 
monuments of the locality, the temple of Jagannath at Pur andtha 
of the Sun at Konarak. There is also a small group in the south 
of Mukhalingam on the coast of the Ganjam 
Mukhalingam series may well be taken to count ^ong he earbest 
examples and to date from the ninth 

tains architectural features bringing <t into u " , 

with the early Chalukyan temples of the Deccan. The m 

Sing example in the group is the Mukhal.ng^vara ^ompnsmg 

five shrines— a central sanctuary with four m,nor sh ""“ ' 
each comer. In its decorative features the temple shows traces 
of both Chalukya and Gupta influences. . 

In Orissa the sanctum (usually a square building) is calied &«/, 
and the assembly hall in front of it bears the 
In larger temples there are two other parts the natmandv or 
dancing hall in front of th ejagamohan, and the bhogmmdir in front 



458 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

of the natmandir — all aligned on one axis. These halls stood on a 
plinth and were invariably of one storey comprising a cubical 
portion below with a pyramidal roof above. Pillars are conspicu- 
ous by their absence here. In larger halls where support was 
necessary to sustain the weight of the pyramidal roof four solid 
piers were introduced, ‘one at each comer of a four-square system 
of roof-beams’. Indeed one chief characteristic of the Orissan 
temple is the plain treatment of the interior in striking contrast with 
the profusely ornamented surfaces of the exterior. 

The temple of Paraduramesvar and the Vaital deul at Bhuvaned- 
var are two early examples of the period 750-900. They are of great 
interest as throwing light on the origins and affiliations of the style. 
The former has a deul and jagamohan with an overall length of 
48 feet, and the tikhara over the deul is 44 feet high. The hall is 
a low rectangular structure with a double roof, plain, massive eaves, 
a doorway on each of its three free sides, and two rows of three 
pillars each in the interior supporting the ceiling of the nave which 
was higher than that of the aisles. The original deul must have 
fallen into decay and been rebuilt later, as is evident from the joint 
between it and the hall, and from the difference in the character 
of the sculpture on the walls of the two buildings. The shape of 
the tikhara is rather thick-set and rudimentary. Two stone grilles, 
one on each side of the doorway on the west, contain representa- 
tions of young dancers and musicians with their instruments, a 
work of considerable artistic merit. Large blocks of stone were 
employed in the construction with no mortar or other cementing 
material. While this feature and some others connect the temple 
with early Chalukya temples at Aihole, the pilasters with vase and 
foliage capitals and other ornamental modes would seem to be 
derived from Gupta art. 

The Vaital deul is notable for its barrel-roofed tikhara, its 
small supplementary shrines at the comers of its jagamohan 
(making it virtually a nascent pancayatana shrine), and for the 
well-balanced arrangement of all its parts. A small structure 
measuring only 18 feet by 25 with a height of 35 feet, it is a very 
pleasing blend of well-marked Southern and Northern forms. 

The second period, from 900- j 100, is represented by the 
small temple of Muktedvar (975) on the outskirts of Bhuvanedvar, 
and by the two very large temples of Lingaraja at Bhuvanedvar 
1000) and the Jagannath at Puri (1100). The Muktedvar registers 





AND ARCHITECTURE 


a considerable advance on the earlier period and is one of the few 
temples of the region containing sculptured decorations in the 
interior. The Lingaraja (PI. XXI) occupies the centre of a large 
quadrangle 520 feet by 465 feet enclosed by a high and massive 
wall with a platform inside making for easy defence when neces- 
sary. Within the enclosure are many small shrines, replicas of the 
central temple. The Lingaraja has all the parts of a large temple 
though the natmandir and the bhogmandir were later additions. 
The most striking feature of the temple is the great Hkhara over 
the deul which dominates the whole town by its height (125 feet) 
and volume. The plastic decoration of its external walls is of 
absorbing interest and gives ample evidence of the fertile invention 
of the artists. 

The construction of Jagannath at Puri was begun about 1100 
by Anantavarman Chodaganga but was not completed till much 
later. It is built on the same plan as the Lingaraja and consists of 
four parts in one alignment. The extreme length is 310 feet and the 
width 80 feet. The tower is nearly 200 feet high. As it stands 
on an eminence, the temple with its soaring Hkhara is an imposing 
landmark for many miles around. Except for its impressive 
proportions this temple is no improvement on the Lingaraja, of 
which it is a close imitation. The action of sea air has rendered 
extensive renovations necessary from time to time and these have 
also detracted from the original appearance of the structure. I he 
natmandir is a large square with a side of 80 feet, and its ceiling 
is borne on 16 pillars in four rows of four each, the one real example 
of a pillared hall in Orissa. There are some 30 to 40 minor 
shrines round the main temple and the whole group is enclosed 
within three concentric walls, known as ‘the three garlands with 



unduly strainir 


It was 1 
as one of 


wheeled chariot being 







giri and reputed to be the builder of many religious edifices. 
Examples of this style are not confined to the Deccan but extend 
to Madhya Pradesh (the Berars) also. 

Under Vijayanagar, South Indian art attained a certain fullness 
and freedom of rich expression in keeping with the general con- 
' ' ' fire, namely the ' ‘ 




front, an ardhamandapa, a similar closed hall in the middle, and the 
garbhagriha in the rear. The mahdmandapa is impressive with 
its deeply recessed sides measuring ioo feet at its greatest length 
and breadth. It stands on a moulded plinth 5 feet high, with 
flights of steps guarded by elephants on its three free sides. A 
very wide double-curved eave surmounted by turrets of brickwork 
is its other notable feature. There are fifty-six pillars inside, 
each twelve feet high. Forty of them are disposed at regular 
intervals to form an aisle round the hall’s outer edge, and the 
remaining sixteen provide an oblong passage in the centre. The 





4 6 4 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

liars are variants of the types generally described above and 
exhibit an amazing exuberance of the most ornate and vigorous 
carvin- The rest of the temple is a unified structure, rectangular 
in shape 135 feet by 67 feet, and its external walls are embellished 
with the usual arrangement of pilasters, niches and canopies. 
Besides the entrance from the mahamandapa on the east the Maha- 
mandapa has two side-entrances ‘each having steps and a pillared 
porch of some size’. Its interior is a square with sides 55 feet long, 
with a square dais atthe centre and one pillar at each of its comers. 
The other pillars are disposed to form an aisle near the penmeter. 
The vimdna is 75 feet long and 72 feet wide and includes a pradak- 
shinabatha on the same level as the outer courtyard. This is 
entered by flights of steps descending on either side of the vestibule 
connecting the garbhagriha with the ardhamandapa. Of the 
remaining structures, the kalyanamandapa , as may be expected, 
throws the rest into the shade by the excellence of its statuary, 
although it is little more than half the size of the mahamandapa. 
Near the kalyanamandapa and facing the entrance to the mahd- 
mandapa is the ralha or chariot of the god. Its base and principal 
storey are carved out of a single block of granite with movable 
wheels, the superstructure of brick having disappeared. Similar 
stone cars are found in other temples of the period, for example at 
Tadpatri and Tiruvalur. 

The Hazara Rama temple, most probably the work of Viru- 
paksha II, is a more modest but perfectly finished example of this 
style. Besides the main temple there are a shrine for the goddess, 
a kalyanamandapa and other subsidiary temples all enclosed in a 
courtyard by a wall 24 feet high. The enclosure is entered by 
means of a well-proportioned flat-roofed porch on the east, which 
leads to the assembly-hall with a group of four huge blackstone 
pillars, one at each comer of a central square. These pillars are 
of unusual design, cubes alternating with fluted cylinders in their 
shafts, all richly carved. There are two other entrances with porch- 
es to the hall — one on each side — leading to the courtyard. The 
vimdna with its lower storey of stone and the pyramidal super- 
structure of brick, now much decayed, is impressive though it is 
less than 50 feet in height. The inner walls of the temple are 







‘surpass those of any other hall of its class I am acquainted with’. 
Outside the main enclosure but in axial alignment with the eastern 
gopura and separated from it by a street, is the Pudumandapam 
known also as ‘Tirumalai’s choultry’. This is a large open hall 
330 feet by 105 feet, divided longitudinally into a nave and two 
aisles by four rows of pillars all very elaborately carved. The 
pillars towards the centre of the hall bear life-size statues of the 
Nayak kings of Madura, the latest being that of Tirumalai, the 
builder of the mandapa. 

The additions made by the Nayaks of Madura to the Ranga- 




468 A HISTORY OF SOUTH INDIA 

Near this gobura at the north-eastern angle of the fourth enclosure 
.. r rfofeet. The celeb- 


lear this gupura at the nortn-easiem aug‘<= 

the Hall of a Thousand Pillars 500 feet by 160 feet. The celeb- 
rated ‘horse-court’ (PI. XXIII) is also in this enclosure. The 
next or third enclosure has gopuras on the north and the south, 
but the latter opening into the fine pillared garudamandapa .is the 
main entrance. This enclosure contains two tanks named after 
the Sun and the Moon. The second enclosure is a covered court 
occupied mainly bv pillared halls with a long processional passage 
on the western side. It has two entrances, from north and 
south Within is the innermost enclosure with its entrance on 
the south side, its sides being 240 feet by 181 feet. The sanctuary 
is a circular chamber set within a square compartment and sur- 
rounded by a larger rectangular chamber; its position is indicated 
■— its golden domical vimana projecting above the flat roof. 

The temple of Ramesvaram, planned and constructed c 


unitary plan like that at Madura, is remarkable for its impressive 
pillared corridors which completely surround it besides forming 
avenues leading up to it. These passages vary in width from 17 to 
21 feet and have a height of about 25 feet. Their total length is 







recalling the rich designs of Persian book-binding and embroidery. 


At Gulbarga, Muhammad Shah built two mosques: the earlier 
and smaller one is now the Shah Bazar Masjid, austere in the simpli- 
city of its style, imitating the Tughlak architecture of Firoz 
Shah’s reign at Delhi. The other, the famous Jami Masjid (1367) 
within the fort (PI. XXVII), has stilted domes and narrow entrances 
typical of the Persian style, but otherwise belonging more to Delhi 
than to Persia. The squat arches of its cloisters, appearing here 
for the first time, become henceforth a familiar feature of Deccan 



surface of en 
and deep boli 
-with anythin 











appendix 


Pages 82-3. Identification of the Satiyaputa Kingdom. 

I now accept the equation of Satiyaputa with Atiyaman (also 
Adigaman or Adigaiman), the ruler of Tagadur or Dharmapun, 
proposed by K. G. Sesha Aiyar and supported by I\ Burrow in 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies (London), 
XII (1948), pp. 136-7 a nd »+ 6 -7 
Page 97. Origin of the Pallavas. 

Their northern origin is emphasized by the crown in the 
shape of an elephant’s scalp offered to Nandivarman II on the 
occasion of his being chosen for the throne (p. 148)* 
reminds us of the coins of Demetnus from N.W. India. (See 
South Indian Inscriptions , Vol. XII, p. n.) 



C olU6 4 ‘ 


jJK«’ S S<'^'”‘ 



ERRATA 


p. 1,1. 
p. 9,1.8 
p. 12,1.35 

p. 20, 1. 21 

p. 40,1.11 

p. 42, 1. 22 

p. 47, 1. 34 

p. 105, 1. 20 

p. 119, 1. 36 

p. 120, 1. 3 

p.123,1.7 

p. 128, I. 35 

p.130,1.1 

p. 133, 1. 1 

p. 135, 1. 27 

p. 135, 1. 36 

p.136,1.5 

p. 138, 1. 27 

p.139,1.4 

p. 143, 1. 37 

p. 144, 1. 27 ... 

p.150,1.9 

p. 161, Bibliography, 

p. 175, 1. 26 

p. 182, 1. 28 

p. 197, Table, 1. 5 
p. 197, Table, 1. 12 
p.212,1.9 
p. 215, 1. 5 


... for Gulburga read Gulbarga 
... for next read third 

... for Malabalipuram read Mahabali- 
puram 

... for Madras read Andhra 
... for Madras read coastal Andhra 
... for VindyaSakti read Vindhyaiakti 
... for Pattuppattu read Pattuppattu 
... for his back read his back — 

... for Kilar read Kilar 
... for traditional, read traditional 
... for Kalavali read Kalavali 
... for manram read manram 
. . . for sangara read sangara, 

... for north read north, 

... for reign read reign, 

... for of god read of the god 
... for peace read place 
. . . for Vikramaditya I read Vikramaditya I 
. . . for is read are 
... for SrKaila read Sriiailam 
1. 9 ... for K. Rice read B. L. Rice 

... for the Sri Vijaya’s read Sri Vijaya's 
... for Suryavalli read Suttamalli 
. . . for Vikramaditya read Vikramaditya V 
... for Jailapa III read Tailapa III 
... for Ma’bar read Ma’bar, 

... for Ballala I 1100-1111 read Ballala I 
1100-1110 


for Vishnuvardhana 1100-1152 read 
Vishnuvardhana 1110-1152 


225 1.40 ... ... /or Deccan read the Deccan 

244 1 13 ... ••• f OT Mahmud Gavan read Mahmud 

Gawan 



ERRATA 


... for Tuluva Narasa read Tuluva Narasa 

... for Nayaka read Nayaks 

... for rajya read rajya 

... for to his capital read of his capital 

... for eighteenth century read the eight- 

... for appartments read apartments 
... for (1406) read (1466) 

... for being read bring 

... for Arthavadadivicara read Arthaodda- 

... for deserve read deserves 
... for Acarya read Acarya 
... for Kaninilai read Kainnilai 
... for authorishp read authorship 
... for Nalayira read Naldyira 
... for alvdrs read alvars 
... for Tirumalai read Tirumalai 
... for vengence read vengeance 
... for Kulottunga II read Kulottunga III 
... for Periyavaccan read Periyavaccan 
... for bears name read bears the name 
... for peoms read poems 
... for Padirruppattandddi read Padirrup - 
pattandddi 

... for known a read known as 
... for Madura, read Madura ; 

... for Tirukkurga-manmiyam read Tirttk- 

... for Ibrahim Kutb Shah read Ibrahim 
Qutb Shah 

... for (VII CENTURY) read (XVII 
CENTURY) 




INDEX 


Abdur Razzak, 31, 259, 295, 297, 
Abhinava VadiVidyananda, 381 


Adichanallur, 60, 6i, 62 
Adigaiman, 118, 131 
Aditya I, 166-7, *68 

Agastya, 64, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 71 
— . legends of, 67 

Ahmad Shah, Bahmani, 238-40 

Ainnurruvar, 319 
Ailareya Araiyyaka , 6^5 

Ajantaf 103, 424, 426, 429-30 
Ajavarman, 108 

Ala-ud-din Bahman Shah, 231-2 
Ala-ud-din II, Bahmani, 241-3 
Ala-ud-din, Khalji, 217, 218, 220 
Alberuni, 29 
Albuquerque, 2 

i Adil Shah, 2. 

— -Idirlsi, 416 
Al-Ishtakhri, 420 
Allasani Peddana, 273, 395 




Appayika, I43 
! Appayva Dikshita, 33 
Arikesari Maravarma 


Amma I, Vengi ruler, 169 
Amoghavarsha Nripatunga, i 54 - 55 » 346 » 

Amoghavarsha II, 169 
Amoghavarsha III, 169 


Andhra Buddhist art, 426 ff. 
Aniyanka Bhima III, Ganga, 2: 


Aryanization of South India, 64 
— , process and results of, 70- 


Attakatha (KathakaH), 402 
Augustus, 26, 136 
Aurangabad, 429-30 


BAdAmi, 43 1-2 
Baha-ud-din Garshas] 


Barbosa, Duarte, 32, 323, 326 
Barradas, 32 

Basava, 381, 382, 383, 384, 41 

Bavari, 65 
Bedsa, 424-5 

~ '^^ofTudda 25.29,3: 


Bhanudeva II. Ganga, 21 1 
Bhanudeva IH, 211 

Bharavi, 33* 

Bhaskaracarya, astronomer, 209 
Bhattakajanka Deva, 387 



INDEX 


I Citramaya, Pallava pretender, 148, 


Dandin, 148, 33*. 364 
Dantidurga, Rashtrakuta, x ; 


I Gandaraditya Chola, 171, 361 
Ganga Devi, author of A 
Vijayam , 255, 336 









486 


INDEX 


Yaj naval kya, 8, 297 
Yamunacaryn, 341, 363. 4* 1 
Yasahkamadeva, Haihaya ruler, 181 
Yejffagu^i, 14 
Yeyrapragada, 39© 


149, 264, 265 




^ & 


PRINTED 


PUBLISHING HOUSE, MfSO&E 



