Kṣatriyas in the Kali Age? Gāgābhaṭṭa & His Opponents Author(s): Madhav M. Deshpande S

Indo-Iranian Journal 55 (2010) 
 
Ksatriyas in the Kali Age? 
Gâgâbhatta & His Opponents 
Madhav M. Deshpande 
lhe University or Michigan e-mail: mmdesh@umich.edu 

Abstract 
This paper deals with the history of the disputes regarding the Ksatriya status of the local ruler Shivaji and the Cândrasenīya Kāyastha Prabhu (CKP) community of Maharashtra. The origin of these disputes lies in the wider dispute concerning whether there are any true Ksatriyas in the Kali age. The CKPs of Maharashtra claimed to be Ksatriyas and thus entitled for the rite of Upanayana, while the dominant regional Brahmin opinion was that they were Südras and not entitled for the Upanayana. The dispute broke out a few years before Shivaji's coronation, and to the discomfort of the local Brahmins, Gāgābhatta of Banaras settled it in favor of the Kāyasthas in his work, the Kāyasthadharmadipa. In decades after Shivaji's death, the dispute broke out again, and within Maharashtra, gradually the Dharmasàstric opinion shifted against the views of Gāgābhatta, and toward the end of the rule of the last Peshwa, this dispute was raised again by Nīlakantha Sāstri Thatte in Pune against the Kāyasthas. I have traced the lineage of Nīlakantha Thatte, through his teacher Vaidyanātha Pāyagunde, to his teacher, the great Nāgesabhatta of Banaras. Nāgesabhatta produced his Vrātyatā-prāyascitta-nirnaya at a sāstra-sabhā in Jaipur, where he argued that there were no pure Ksatriyas surviving in the Kali age, and that the impure ones do not have the eligibility for Upanayana through some expiation. So the Kāyasthas could not claim to be genuine Ksatriyas either. It was this opinion of Nāgesabhatta, counter to the opinion of Gāgābhatta, that steadily gained popularity among the Pune Brahmins during the rule of the Peshwas, finally reflected in the activities of Nīlakantha Thatte. 

Keywords Dharmasāstra, Gāgābhatta, Nāgesabhatta, Vaidyanātha, Nllakantha Sāstri Thatte, Shivaji, Peshwas, Ksatriya, Cândrasenîya Kāyastha Prabhu, Südra, caste disputes 
)

Background of the Debate 
In the seventeenth century Maharashtra, two related disputes seem to have emerged, both going back to a common root: Were there communities and/or individuals present at this time who were genuinely qualified to be treated as Ksatriyas in terms of the categories of the Hindu Dharmasāstra? Whether or not one was a Ksatriya in Dharmasàstric terms did not prevent one from becoming a de facto ruler (rājā), but it could prevent one from undergoing a proper royal consecration ceremony (abhiseka), a goal that was not sought by many de facto rulers for several previous centuries. The other consequence of not being considered a true Ksatriya may include ineligibility for the initiation rite of Upanayana, the sacred thread ceremony, which ritually admitted a young male into the three higher orders of the Hindu society, namely Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas. This rite entitled 
a person to engage in religious ceremonies using the proper Vedic mantras, learn the Vedas, etc. Again, we do not hear about any major contestations from communities or individuals on this issue before the seventeenth century. Among the disputes that emerge in the seventeenth century Maha 
rashtra in this regard are i) the genuine Ksatriyahood of Shivāji, an emerging warrior chief who wanted the ceremony of royal consecration for himself to establish himself as a dharmically proper Hindu king, and ii) the eligibility of the Cāndraseniya Kāyastha Prabhu community of Maharashtra for the initiatory rite of Upanayana. 

There was an established pattern of either sending the locally unresolved Dharmasāstric disputes to authoritative centers of Brahmanical learning like Paithan or Banaras for resolution, or inviting authoritative persons from such centers of learning to the region to resolve the local disputes. We have a number of such decision-documents relating to disputes in the Maharashtrian communities going back to the fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries, and this pattern continues into the subsequent periods until the coming of the British colonial rule. The authority figure that emerges into prominence in resolving some of these disputes is the person of Visvesvara Pandita, more popularly known by the name of Gāgābhatta. As documented in the Syenavi-jāti-dharmanirnaya, Gāgābhatta led a committee of scholars invited by Shivaji's court around 1664 and to resolve a dispute over the full Brahminhood of the community of the Syenavls, later known as the Sārasvata Brahmins of the coastal regions of Maharashtra, including Goa. 
In arguing for the full Brahminhood of the Syenavls, contested by the other local Brahmins, Gāgābhatta and his colleagues used evidence from the tra 


ditional Dharmasâstric and Purânic materials, and arguing on the basis of implications of narratives in these works, they reached their conclusions. In reaching their conclusions based on these Purânic narratives, the pan 
dits were essentially trying to open new spaces by reading between the lines of the narratives, and the final verdicts became authoritative not so much 
by the strength of the arguments, but by the perceived authority of the per sons rendering these verdicts. Such verdicts, though accepted by the com munities at a given time and place were eventually subject to dispute and repudiation, if the perceived authority of the verdict-givers eroded by the emergence of new circumstances. 
Two Principal Disputes in the 17th Century Maharashtra 
The main disputes that emerged around 1674 ad were the eligibility of Shiv aji for a royal consecration ceremony and the eligibility of the Cāndrasenlya Kāyastha Prabhus to have an Upanayana. Both of these questions are intricately related to each other. The very basic question was whether there were any true Ksatriyas alive during the Kali age. The questions were prompted by the Purānic story of the sage Parasurima having killed in revenge all the Ksatriyas on the earth twenty-one times, and by the Purānic narratives that claimed that there will be no Ksatriya dynasties after the Nandas [nandântam ksatriyakulam], the precursors of the Mau ryas in the 3rd century bc [tatahprabhrtisüdrā bhüpāld bhavisyanti, Visnu Purâna, 4.24.21; also Bhāgavata-Purāna, 12.1.8-10]. Tbese stories were 
widely interpreted by the authors on the Dharmasâstra to suggest that there were only two Varnas left in the Kali-age, the Brahmins and the Südras. 
Everyone other than Brahmins is a Südra [kalāv ādyantayoh sthitih, quoted in Kamalākarabhatta's Südrakamalākard\. This situation becomes further 
complicated by a possible implication, equally contested in the sources, that the Ksatriyas physically survived in the Kali age, but by non-performance of their initiation for generations \patitasāvitrika], they reached a Südra like state. Total non-existence of the Ksatriyas was one alternative, while the existence of the Südra-like fallen Ksatriyas was the other alternative. Assuming that there are such fallen Südra-like Ksatriyas, is there a pos sible restitution [suddhi\ for them to their pure Ksatriya status, through performance of some expiation [prāyascitta, vràtyastoma] ? Here too, some authorities claimed that there is no such restitution, while others claimed 
that such restitution is possible. 


Gāgābhattas Views Prior to Shivaji's Coronation 
Looking at all the documentary evidence available to us, we can assert the following about what Gâgâbhatta achieved. From his preamble to the Syenavijātidharmanirnaya, composed ten years before Shivāji's coronation in 1674ad, it is clear that Gâgâbhatta accepts Shivaji's father Shahaji as someone born in a pure royal family [vimala-rāja-kula], and he glorifies Shivaji's achievements against the Mughals of Delhi, and addresses him as Shivaji-Ràjà. While this does not touch the Dharmasāstric question, it shows Gàgàbhatta's acceptance of Shivaji both as a person born in a "pure royal family" and as a de facto Rājā "king", ten years before the question of his eligibility for the consecration ceremony was raised.1 While none of the texts composed by Gâgâbhatta that are available to us explicitly discuss the issues involved in how he decided the question of Shivaji's authentic 
Ksatriyahood, the surviving text of the Rājyābhisekapaddhati "Procedure for the Royal Consecration" composed by Gâgâbhatta on the occasion of Shiv aji's royal consecration includes Vedic mantras, and hence one must con clude that by the time of the actual royal consecration, Shivaji was deemed to be completely eligible to be treated as a full Ksatriya.2 While the text of the Rājyābhisekapaddhati does not tell us that Gâgâbhatta made Shivaji to undergo a purificatory rite, the received reports from other sources do indicate this purificatory rite, and the fact that Shivaji underwent the cer emony of Upanayana, and then his queens were dharmically remarried to him. This would suggest that Gâgâbhatta accepted the following premises: 
" In his Mimâmsâ work Sivârkodaya, Gâgâbhatta says that he composed this work by the ājnā "order, command, behest" of Siva (= Sivàji) who is further described as being the Lord of the Earth (bhümipati), B.K. Apte (1974-1975: 90). We do not know when exactly this work was composed. However, it again shows at least that Gâgâbhatta accepted the de facto royal status of Sivāji at the time of writing this work. 2) Gâgâbhatta was not alone in composing a procedure-text like the Rājyābhisekapaddhati. His uncle Kamalākarabhatta also composed a similar text, Râjyâbhisekaprayoga, a copy of which is found at the BORI (manuscript 404/1891-1895). A work by the title Râjyâ bhisekapaddhati was composed by Raghunàtha (BORI manuscript 297/1887-1891), and Gâgâbhatta's contemporary, and a person regarded as an authority by the court of Shiv aji, Anantadeva, composed the Râjadharmakaustubha (Gaekwads Oriental Series, Baroda, 1935), and this work contains elaborate descriptions of the ceremony of royal coronation. While we have no explicit statements from these other authorities that they prescribed any sort of expiatory rites for the not-so-pure Ksatriyas, their very activity of composing these texts may have given Gâgâbhatta some ideas about how to make such a coronation into reality. 

Madhav M. Deshpande / Indo-Iranian Journal 55 (2010) 95-120 99 
1. Ksatriyas did survive after the attempts to exterminate them by Parasu 
rāma as well after the rule of the Nandas. 
2. "Through non-performance of the initiation (upanayana) rites for gen erations, these Ksatriyas reached a Südra-like (vrātya /patitasāvitrika) 
status. 
3. Through the performance of proper purificatory rites, a Vrātya Ksatriya can be reinstated to the status of a pure Ksatriya and become eligible for Vedic rites like Upanayana and royal consecration (abhiseka). 
Gagâbhatta on the Status of the Cândrasenīya Kāyastha Prabhus 
In relation to the status of the Cândrasenīya Kāyastha Prabhus, Gāgābhatta partially validated their claim to Ksatriyahood. His Kāyasthadharmadipa takes recourse to the Purinic story about the origin of the CKPs. It distin guishes between three types of Kāyasthas: Citragupta or Brahmakāyastha, Samkaraja Kāyastha [Kāyastha born out of a mixture of Varnas], and the Cândrasenīya Kāyasthas. In relation to the last category, the following explanation is offered. When Parasurāma was killing all Ksatriyas on earth in revenge, the pregnant queen of the king Candrasena took shelter in the hermitage of the sage Dālbhya. In pursuit, when Parasurāma arrived at Dilbhya's hermitage, he was pleased with Dālbhyas hospitality, and offered Dālbhya a boon. Dālbhya requested that the life of the unborn child of the queen of Candrasena who had taken shelter in his hermitage be spared. Parasurāma agreed to save the child on the condition that the child, though a born Ksatriya, must not do the function of a Ksatriya. This is how the CKPs became accountants, even though they claimed a Ksatriya birth. Gāgābhatta allowed them the ceremony of Upanayana, only as a rite of passage (samskâra), but did not allow them the study of the Veda. This fine print is lost in most of the debate, and the popular opin ion is that Gāgābhatta fully accepted the Ksatriyahood of the CKPs and allowed their Upanayana. Ultimately, the story of the CKPs also rests on the assumption that at least some Ksatriyas survived in the Kali age, and that they can undergo purificatory rites and be reinstated to their proper caste status. In the days of Shivaji, the local Brahmins, and especially some of Shivaji's Brahmin ministers like Moropant Pingle, were against this view. Gāgābhatta's status as the leading scholar from Banaras made his views carry the day for a few decades. The documents from Shivaji's court list Anan tadeva along with Gāgābhatta as authorities who resolved this dispute.3 
There is a letter sent out by Raghunātha Pandita, a minister of Shivaji, to the CKPs 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-lranian Journal 33 (2010) 93—120 
The CKP dispute at Shivaji's court appears to have arisen before the dis pute regarding Shivaji's own eligibility for royal coronation. It was Balaji Avaji Chitnis,4 a CKP, who assisted Shivaji's search for his Rajput Ksatriya roots by sending investigators to the north (cf. Shejwalkar 1964: 477; Srisivadigvijaya, pp. 249 ff.), and, according to the Cipiis-Bakhar, it was Balaji Avaji who suggested to Shivaji that he invite Gāgābhatta in connec 
tion with the coronation. Therefore, it is very likely that, though the Sāstric Nirnaya about the status of the CKPs was rendered by Gāgābhatta, Shivaji's own predilection in the matter is also visible in the documents.5 
Predicament of the Candraseniya Kāyastha Prabhu s after Shivaji 
Other Brahmins were not so sympathetic to the cause of the CKPs in later times. A series of documents from the Satara court of Shahu, Shivajis 
grandson, reveal how the issue erupted and, in spite of Shahu's sympathy in favor of the CKPs, was for a while resolved against them under the pressure of a massive demonstration by the Brahmins of Pune, Vai, and Satara. With ten thousand Brahmins converging upon Satara, including representatives of Brahmins from Shringeri and Varanasi, the mass Sâstrasabhâ decided the issue against the CKPs. Here the documents refer to the story of Dālbhya, 
that refers to Anantadeva and Gāgābhatta and says that these great scholars had resolved the question of the Ksatriyahood of the CKPs and their eligibility for Upanayana, cf. T.V. Gupte (1912: Appendix II, p. 12). 4) Gupte (1919, pp. 6-7) reports that the question of the Vedic rites for the CKPs began with Balaji Avaji's desire to have the upanayana ceremony performed for his elder son in Sake 1591 (1669AD). However, Shivajis Brahmin ministers Moropant Pingle and Raghu nathpant Amatya opposed this notion. Shivaji then sent this dispute to Anantadeva and Gāgābhatta in Banaras. In the CKP documents, including the Citnis Bakhar, the role of Bâlâjī Àvaji is somewhat exaggerated. It is not clear how much convincing Gāgābhatta needed from Bālāji Avaji. The Sabhasad Bakhar attributes the initiative regarding coronation to Gāgābhatta himself. If the date of the Syenavijâtidharmanirnaya of 1664 ad is valid, then Shivaji was already in touch with Gāgābhatta in such Dharmasāstric matters, and it seems natural that he would have sent such disputes to the same authorities. On Balaji Avaji's role in seeking validation of Shivajis Ksatriyahood, see: Srisivadigvijaya, pp. 249 ff., Gupte (1919, pp. 52 If.). On the opposition of the local Brahmins to Shivajis coronation, see She jwalkar 1977, p. 226. Also see Shejwalkar 1964, pp. 479 ff. for the specific documentation regarding the dispute about Shivaji s eligibility for coronation and how Gāgābhatta resolved it. 5) Shivajis trust in and affection for Balaji Avaji Chitnis is recorded in several sources, cf. Srisivadigvijaya, pp. 249 ff.; Gupte 1919; but for a more cautious assessment, see Shejwalkar 1964, pp. 386 fF. For an important âjnàpatra dated to 1674 ad by Shivaji addressed to Balaji Avaji, see: PN. Deshpande 1983: 159. 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal (2010) 95-120 
but with a new twist. The CKPs are made out to be the sons of a Dâsl of 
Dâlbhya, and hence clearly belonging to the status of Südras. The Karhada Brahmin, Mr. Athalye, who sided with the CKPs and represented their case at the court of Shahu, was forced to undergo a prâyascitta "expiation" and admit his mistake.6 Referring to a number of such antecedents, Sawai Madhavrao Peshwa issued a stiff set of conditions on the behavior of the 
CKPs to which they were forced to agree in writing (katabā lihün dila)-J 
We shall not perform any of our rites with Vedic mantras. Even if known, we will not utter the Vedic mantras. We will not make rice pindas during the srâddha. We will carry out the worship of Devi and other rites as per the Purânas. We will not invite Brahmins for a meal in our homes. 
We will not do sāligrāma-püjā. We will worship only at those shrines where the Südras worship. We will say dandavat to Brahmins. We will not employ Brahmin men and women as servants inside or outside of 
our homes. 
The surviving historical documents indicate to us the political-executive power that the Sawai Madhavrao Peshwa put behind this decision. Vad (1911, 287 fr.) not only provides the text of the order issued by the Sawai Madhavrao Peshwa, he also gives a long list of 196 names of individuals and localities to whom copies of this order were sent and these individuals were advised that any violations of this order would lead to stiff penal ties. Without the backing of the executive authority of the Peshwa, the Nirnayapatra would have remained ineffective. Religious authorities like the various Sankarâcâryas also issued Nirnayapatras that began with a state ment of the high standing of the office and ended with a stamp that reads mahānusāsanam varivarti.8 
6) P.N. Patwardhan, 1912: 93 ff. The first document relating to the court of Shahu is dated to Sake 1671 (1749AD). The second document is an order imposing restrictions on the CKPs issued by Savai Madhavrao Peshwa. For documents relating to the continued disputes over the rights of the CKPs, see: Sardesai-Kulkarni-Kale 1933: 21-22, 59, V.T. Gune 1953: 3 3 8— 340. 71 Gupte (1919) includes a number of Nirnayapatras relating to this dispute, though all of these side with the claims of the CKPs to Vedic rites. Without access to the originals of these documents, it is very difficult to assess their authenticity. This is the situation with most published and re-published documents. 8) The beginning of an âjnâpatra issued by the Samkarācārya of the Karavīrapītha in 1913 ad in support of the CKPs (cited in Gupte 1919: 68) reads: svastisrimatsamastasura vpidapüjitapādāravindasivapratibimbavaryasrimatparamahamsaparivrājakācāryapadavākya 


Multiple Conflicting Versions of Gâgâbhatta's Kâyasthadharmadīpa 
In subsequent disputes on the same issue, two versions of Gâgâbhatta's work on the Kâyasthas seem to have appeared. As K.T. Gupte (1919) reports, the Kâyasthadharmadīpa became available in two versions at some point. The Kâyasthadharmadīpa known to Gupte prescribed non-Vedic rites for Kâyasthas, but then contained a statement that the Cāndrasenlya Kāyastha Prabhus were not to be treated as Südras, and that Vedic rites for them will 
be taught in another text, namely the Kâyasthadharmapradīpa: 
citraguptacāndrasentyakdyasthayor vedoktamantrasahitâh kriyās tds tu matkrta kàyasthapradipe drastavyāh / atra tu kapildksirapānenety âdini kāyasthānām vedâdhikâranisedhaparâni vdkyāny uktāni tāni tu sarnkarajaparāni (iti) bo dhyam / citraguptakāyasthacāndraseniyakāyasthasamkarajakāyastha iti kdyastha padasya jātitraye 'pi sattvāt kāyasthapadena bhramād dharmasamkaro bhavati / tata ādau asmin granthe samkarajakāyasthdnām dharmakarmdny ucyante / atha kāyasthadharmapradipe citraguptacāndraseniyayor dharmān vaksydmi P 
Both the texts are now ascribed to the same Gigibhatta, whose authority could not be questioned so easily. One can read the details of the politics of the creation of competing texts and counter-texts in K.T. Gupte's (1919) scathing attack on the Marathi historian V.K. Rajwade who was deemed to have belittled the CKP claims. One needs to carefully go through the avail 
able manuscript material and its origin in order to fully understand what is 
going on. It seems likely that Gāgābhatta's original work did offer Vedic rites for the Kāyastha Prabhus of Maharashtra (as seen in the BORI ms of the Kāyasthadharmadipa). Then someone produced a version of Gāgābhatta's work that treated all Kāyasthas, without exception, as samkaraja Südras, 
pramānapārāvārapartnayamaniyamāsanaprānāyāmapratyāhāradhyānadhāranāsamādhyast āmgayogānusthānanisthatapascakravartyanādyavicchinnaguruparamparāprāptasaddarsanasa msthāpanācāryavyākhyānasimhāsanādhisvarasakalanigamāgamasārahrdayasāmkhyatrayapra tipādakasakalanāstikamatocchedapürvakasakaladharmasamsthāpanaikadhurinavaidikamār 
agurumandalācāryasrimacchamkarācāryanvayasamjātābhinavapancagamgātiravāsakamahik injalkodbhavasrtmadabhinavavidyāJamkarabhāratisvāmikrtāni sribhāksaparivāracchātrānām anudinam edhamānabhavyajanakāni srimacchamkarārādhanāvasariyanārāyanasmara ndni / srīgurubhaktiparâyanesu sakaUsisyavrndesakaLyānābhivardhakāsthpurahsaram anusā saniyam idam / " I have not found this passage in the Kâyasthadharmadipa mss at the BORI (# 342/ 1887— 1891). I have not found any reference to Kâyasthadharmapradipa in the BORI mss. 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal (2010) 95—120 103 
and took away their Vedic rites.10 At this point, a pro-CKP pandit inserted the above quoted statement into the text of that work, saying that the vedic rites for the CKPs will be treated in a separate supplementary work, namely the Kàyasthadharmapradīpa, and produced that version.11 This seems to be a likely course of events, though one cannot be certain without checking all the available manuscript material and its origins. 
Emerging Oposition to Gāgābhattas Views 
While the high standing of "national" authorities like Gāgābhatta may have temporarily silenced the local voices, the local voices surfaced again and again, and at times clearly expressed their resentment of "outsiders" like Gāgābhatta dabbling in the local affairs. Historians like Shejwalkar (1964: 46) note that the Brahmins at the court of Shivaji were not as assertive,12 as they seem to have become during the days of the Peshwas. The anti-CKP document dating to Sake 1671 (1749 ad) openly criticizes Gāgābhatta and says that his decision on performing upanayana for Shivaji was a mistake, and it calls it amârga: 
"" Several works on Dharmasâstra do not appear to specify the sub-types of the Kāyasthas and create an impression that all Kāyasthas are Südras. T.V. Gupte (191a: 4) refers to the text of Jâtiviveka, which evidently did not distinguish such sub-types. n) There are textual indications that the Kâyasthadharmapradîpa as printed by Gupte (1919) is concocted by altering the text of the Kâyasthadharmadîpa. The benediction of the Kāyasthadharmadipa reads: 
natvābhirakisoram coram vidyudvadambudha(da?)prakhyam / kāyasthadharmadipam gāgābhattas tanoti lilātah // 
The benediction of the Kâyasthadharmapradîpa reads: 
natvābhirakisoram coram vidyudvadambudhaprakhyam / kāyasthapradipo 'yam gāgābhattas tanoti lilātah II 
Here the second line of the verse does not even scan metrically and is ungrammatical. It seems most likely that the Kâyasthadharmapradîpa is a slightly altered version of the Kāyasthadharmadipa. 12) Gupte (1919: 99) reports that the Brahmins of Maharashtra had excomunicated Gāgā bhatta for approving the Ksatriya status of Shivaji. In opposition to Gāgābhattas opinion, Nānā Phadnavis, the Kārbhāri of the Peshwas allowed only a Paurânika Upanayana for the kingofSatara (Gupte, 1919: 95-96). 


pahile vedasāstrasampanna kailâsavdsi gâgâbhattayāmni ksetrisarmâms adhikâra râjyâs vrtabandha karün gâitrī-upadesa karùn sthàpile te karma siddhīs gele nâhi. donahī vamsâne nirmûla jâhâle. he pratyaksa jânûn āmārgāne vartalyās sādhya srikrpâ nâhi. (P.N. Patwardhan 1912: 96) 
This statement from the Brahmins of the Peshwa period claims that Gāgā bhatta was mistaken in treating Shivaji as a Ksatriya and offering upanayana to him with the teaching of the Vedic Gāyatri mantra, and that the non dharmic coronation eventually resulted in both the branches of Shivaji's line drying up without (non-adopted) descendants. The same document also produces a twist on Gāgābhatta's Purānic narrative regarding the origin of the CKPs. According to Gāgābhatta, the original Cāndrasenlya Kāyastha was the son of the king Candrasena, whose wife took shelter at the her mitage of the sage Dālbhya. Now, the document cited above claims that the original Kāyastha was the son of a maid (dàsī) of Dālbhya, and hence the CKPs were indeed Südras: 
mag parabhuci utpatti kothün mhanon prascchd keli tevhà dâlabhya rusi bote tyāce dāsipāsün tyāmci utpatti tyāmst adhikār konatec gosticā nāht, keval südrā pāsün utpanna mhanün parabhü he nāmābhidhān yāprakāre vartamān āsatām ānyathā mārga padavi jaryāmst dili tar siddhis jāne kathin. 
(document in P.N. Patwardhan 1912: 96) 
Such statements shock the modern sensitivities in Maharashtra. However, 
they point to the extremes of the spectrum within which the dharmasâstric opinions oscillated. These instances demonstrate to us the dynamics of decision-making based on the Sanskritic tradition, that at once claimed to 
be timeless and universal, and yet at the same time was deeply entrenched in specific temporal, geographic, social and political environments, that con tinuously shifted and led to the emergence of a bewildering mass of conflict ing opinions seen Sanskrit and vernacular documents. The Sanskrit docu ments are deeply rooted in the vernacular local reality, and can make full sense only within that local reality. The texts exist only in the forms in which they are produced and reproduced, and the production and reproduction of texts is at all times a highly motivated activity. The motivations, real or suspected, are often clearly referred to in the available Sanskrit and vernac ular documents, including dvesabuddhi "hatred" and dravyalobha "greed" among Brahmins and others, and ostracism and fear of various kinds of reprisals by the different parties. The Sanskrit-based knowledge was con tinuously created and negotiated within these complicated parameters. 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-lranian Journal 53 (2010) 95—120 105 
Nīlakantha Sastrī Thatte: Reversal of the Status of the CKPs 
Chronologically speaking, the last most prominent person who gets in volved in a furious debate and dispute on the status of the CKPs and others is the Pandit Nīlakantha Shastri "Ihatte (1750-1834AD) of the late Peshwa 
and early British period in Maharashtra. The accounts of Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte that we have fall into two opposite categories. One set of documents and analyses presents Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte as the main villain who, joining other villains, virulently opposed the status of the CKPs and Sonars in Maharashtra. Other sources, particularly relating to the tradition of Sanskrit grammar in Maharashtra, glorify Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte as being almost the new incarnation of the great grammarian Pānini. On the face of it, these two personas of Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte seem unrelated to each other, but I want to point out that they may be intrinsically related to each other. 
Most of the information regarding Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte as a great grammarian comes from K.V. Abhyankar (1954: 25—29). Nīlakantha Shas tri Thatte, as a bright young Brahmin from Pune, upon recommendation from the court justice Ràmasâstrī Prabhune, was sent to Banaras by the Peshwa for advanced education in Sanskrit. He is said to have studied with 
the great grammarian Vaidyanâtha Pàyagunde (1690-1780AD), who was himself a direct disciple of the illustrious grammarian Nāgesabhatta (1650 1730AD), a junior contemporary of the great Gāgābhatta. The oral tradi tions from Banaras report that Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte engaged in a seri ous debate on grammatical topics with his teacher Vaidyanâtha Pàyagunde, and the pleased teacher called him an incarnation of Pānini. He was highly respected at the Peshwa court. His disciples in many different branches of learning dominated the post-Peshwa Sanskrit tradition in Pune, including the famous Bhâskarasâstrī Abhyankar and his lineage represented in Pune by Vāsudevasāstri Abhyankar and K.V. Abhyankar. Many prominent schol ars of Sanskrit grammar in modern times, including the late Vāmanasāstri Bhāgavat and Shivaram Dattatreya Joshi (and their students like myself), belong to the lineage of Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte. Though Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte never officially served at the Peshwa court, he was the Adalat Shastri in Satara from 1818 to 1821 (S. Kulkarni 1995: 143). 
It appears that Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte got involved in the so-called Grāmanyas "restrictions" on groups like the CKPs and Sonars who claimed to be Ksatriyas and Brahmins respectively.13 The Gramanya of 1826 in 
13) There is not only a grammatical tradition linking Nllakantha Thatte to later pandits in 


the case of the CKPs, as in previous Grarnanyas, involved die question of whether the CKPs could perform their religious rites according to the Vedic mantras. The CKPs claimed to be Ksatriyas, and the Ksatriyas, by tradition, had the right to perform sacrifice, to give charity, and to study the Vedas. 
The CKPs claimed, that as Ksatriyas, they were entitled to these three rights. The Brahmins (or at least some of them) contested these claims, and argued that the great Parasurāma of the epic period had killed off all Ksatriyas twenty-one times, and hence there were no true Ksatriyas left in the Kali age. Thus, all non-Brahmins, including the CKPs and the ruling Marathā kings, were Südras. 
In 1825, Balwantrao Chitnis, the secretary of the Satara Raja, requested the Sankaràcârya of the Sankeshwar Math to resolve the question of the Ksatriyahood of the CKPs. Without resolving the root question, the Sanka ràcârya simply asserted that each caste should be allowed to continue with its own established tradition, and no change in this practice should be made. However, when the Sankaracârya later traveled to Poona, the promi nent local Brahmins persuaded him to revise his decision and to declare that the CKPs and the Sonars were no more than Südras. Among the leading Brahmins opposing the Ksatriya status of the CKPs were Chinta manrao Patwardhan, the Chief of Sangli, and Balajeepant Natu, the for mer assistant to Grant Duff and Mountstuart Elphinstone. Nilakantha Shastri Thatte was related to Balajeepant Natu. Natus daughter was mar ried to Nilakantha Shastri Thatte's adoptive son, Nārāyana Shastri Thatte. Nilakantha Shastri Thatte's relationship with Balajee Pant Natu may have obligated him to some extent to follow his line against the CKPs.14 Sumitra Kulkarni (1995: 189) reports: 
Maharashtra, but some of these pandits, notably Vāsudeva Shastri Abhyankar, produced a very conservative response to social reforms in his Dharmatattvanirnaya. 14' "Narrain Shastree Thutey, a son-in-law of Ballajee Punt Nathoos, who resides at Poonah, has had, through his father-in-law's interference, a perpetual wurshasun of 1250 Rupees per annum, conferred on him from the Sattara treasury." This is one of the charges against Balajeepant Natu, cf. Case of Krushnajee Sadasew Bhidey, the accuser of Lieutenant-Colonel Ovans, and Ballajee Punt Nathoo, of Bribery and Corruption at Sattara, 1845, p. 14. London: Effingham Wilson, Royal Exchange (digitized by Google from the Bodleian Library, Oxford University). Nàràyana Thatte was involved around 1840s in various disputes that revolved around the conversion to Christianity in Mumbai of a certain Seshadri, cf. Oturkar (1950). So it seems that the Thane lineage has been deeply involved in these disputes. But clearly he was also regarded as a leading pandit in his own right. In his letter to K.M. Chatfield, Director of Public Instruction, dated 7th July, 1880, R.G. Bhandarkar says that he proposed to catalogue the book/manuscript collections of Gangadhar Shastri Datar and Narayana 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal 5} (2010) 95—120 107 
The issue whether the Prabhus were the Kshatriyas or not was discussed ror two years in a conference held at the Belbag in Poona. It is interesting to note that on this issue the Brahmin caste itself was divided into two groups. Raghavacharya Gajendragadkar, a well known learned pandit and 'Vajra-Taka' were of the opinion that the prabhus were the Kshatriyas. The opposite group was headed by Nilkanthashastri Thatte, a learned pandit and expert on Hindu Dharmashastra. He was a former judge of the Satara Court (Adalat) and was held in high esteem by all sections of the society. He did not subscribe to the view that the Prabhus belonged to the Kshatriya caste. 
Wagle (1980 and 1982) has discussed in detail the daily oscillations during this debate and the narratives discussed by Wagle, with original sources documented by T.V. Gupte (1904 and 1912), K.T. Gupte (1919), and Thakare (1919), seem to suggest that Nilakantha Shastri Thatte went on changing his positions under pressures of various kind, though finally he comes across from these narratives as an arch opponent of the CKPs. Sumitra Kulkarni (1995:190) also details another related dispute that arose around 1826: 
The Gramanya between the Brahmins and the Marathas evolved out of the Prabhu Gramanya of 1826. The brahmins were not ready to accept the Chha trapati of Satara and other maratha families as Kshatriyas. According to the brahmins, Parshuram eradicated the Kshatriyas twenty-one times and there fore no Kshatriyas were left on earth. So the present Marathas were Kunbis and not the Kshatriyas. The jagirdars of Satara in their letters addressed to Pratapsinha only as Chhatrapati and not Kshatriya Kulwantansa as we find in the original title of the founder of the Maratha power—Shivaji. We do find a reference in the Rojnishi of Raja Pratapsinha that he refused to reply to Chintamanrao Patwardhan of Sangli as he did not address him as Kshatriya Kulwantansa. 
This dispute, briefly outlined here, resulted into a full blown dispute in subsequent times and spread to Kolhapur, Baroda, and Pune, and under the general title of "Vedokta Dispute," this conflict between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas has been richly documented by Copland (1973), Wagle (1987), O'Hanlon (1983 and 1985) and Pawar (1985). It is not clear what 
role, if any, Nllakantha Shastri Thatte played in the wider dispute regarding 
Shastri Thatte, cf. Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Library ofthe Deccan College, 1884, p. I. A.R. Kulkarni (2000: 198-199) reports that the French orientalist Charles D'Ochoa, during his visit to Poona in 1843—1844, made a listing of 491 books and manuscripts from the collection of Nilakantha Shastri Thatte. 


the status of the Maratha Ksatriyas, but his association with Chintamanrao Patwardhan of Sangli in the dispute against the status of the CKPs would suggest that he was ideologically inclined not to grant to Marathas the status of Ksatriyas.15 He was clearly not a lone villain, but represented the continuity of the majority Brahmin opinion that had developed during the period of Narayan Rao Peshwa, and reflected in the views of Ayyâshastri, who succeeded the well known Ramashastri Prabhune, as the Nyāyādhisa at the late Peshwa court. The powerful Nana Phadnis, the Kirbhirl of the Peshwas during the last days of the Peshwa rule, was also of the same view.16 
Kāyastha-parabhü-dharmādarsa of Nilakantha Sâstrī Thatte 
I want to briefly discuss the only surviving Sanskrit text attributed explicitly to Nilakantha Shastri Thatte, namely the Kāyastha-parabhü-dharmādarsa, available in a manuscript in the Limaye Collection of manuscripts at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute in Poona. The manuscript is dated to 1827 and the work appears to have been composed in the heat of the CKP dispute in Pune in which Nilakantha Shastri Thatte was deeply involved. In relation to this work, P.K. Gode (1956: 76) makes the follow 
ing comment: 
The adopted son of Nilakantha Süri Thatte was married to the daughter (Tai) of Sardar Bâlâjî Nārāyana Nātü in adi8i8. (Vide p. 123 of Thatte Kula Vrttânta, Poona, 1936). This Sardar Bālājipant Nātü was associated with the Kdyastha Prabhu dispute of Saka 1745 (= ad 1823). It is possible to suppose that Nilakantha Süri composed his Kāyastha-parabhü-dharmādarsa in con nection with the dispute of 1823 ad to vindicate his relatives (Bâlâjîpant's) 
15) Nīlakantha Thatte's role in decisions relating to suttee and abortion is discussed by A.R. Kulkarni (1996: 189) andWagle (1998: 53—57). Sumitra Kulkarni (1995: 187) reports that the widow of Dajeeba Lagu was prevented from becoming suttee by Nīlakantha Shastri Thatte among others. 
Nāyak (1877) provides important local narratives explaining some of the reasons why the fights between the Prabhus (CKP as well as Pathare/Pattanes) and the Chitpavan Brahmins may have reignited in the region of Konkan in the middle of the 18th century. The first reason Nayak offers is that the Prabhus were appointed as officers by the Portugese in areas like Vasai close to Mumbai, where they were required by rhe Portugese to force all Hindus including Brahmins to join in forced labor (Veth). The Brahmins and the Chitpavans in the region in particular held the Prabhus responsible for this. The second reason offered is that the Prabhus in the region of Mumbai built the Siddhivinayak Ganesh temple in Mumbai, and offered the priest-ship to Deshastha Brahmins, disregarding the claims of the local Chitpavan Brahmins. This apparently enraged the Konkan Brahmins to take their fights to local officials of the Peshwas. 

Madbav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal 53 (2010) 95—120 109 
position against the Kāyastha Prabhus. If this inference is correct the date of Kàyastha-parabhû-dharmâdaria must lie between ad 1823 and ad 1827, the date of the manuscript of this work. 
Hie Kāyastha-parabhü-dharmādarsa of Nilakantha Shastri Thatte17 is not a serious Dharmasāstric contribution, but looks like a work of conve 
nience. First he introuduces only one type of Kāyastha, a mixed caste born from the union of a Māhisya woman and a Vaideha man. The Māhisya woman herself is the progeny of a mixed Ksatriya+Vaisya parentage, and the Vaideha man is also the progeny of a Vaisya man and a Brahmin woman. Thus, the Kāyastha is a second generation mixed progeny. Such a progeny cannot be Ksatriya. Then he cites Kamalikara (author of the well known Südrakamalākara)18 and says that according to Kamalàkara, there are two more types of Kāyasthas, namely the Citragupta Kāyasthas and the Cāndraseniya Kāyasthas. This is somewhat similar to what Gāgābhatta reports in his Kâyasthadharmadīpa. However, citing some of the same nar ratives as Gāgābhatta, Nllakantha Shastri Thatte interprets the line ràmâ jnayā sa dālbhyena ksatradharmâd bahiskrtah to mean that, to save the life 
of the child of the queen of Candrasena, Dālbhya categorically made him un-Ksatriya. He removed his Ksatriyadharma, namely his Ksatriyahood. This is a conclusion different from that of Gāgābhatta, who argued that the 
17) Another work, Parabhûjâtinirnaya (BORI mss 567/1883-1884), gives a fascinating account of the fights of CKPs with Brahmins, but the text seems to refer to the disputes covering the period of Sambhaji and Rajaram, and refers to a nirnaya made by Kesava Pandita. 
18' Interestingly, one may note that the editors of the 1861 Bombay edition of Kamalākara bhattas Südrakamalākara, namely, Ganesh Bapuji Malvankar and Vishnu Bapuji Bapat explicitly say in the preface that their edition was based on a manuscript of this work that came from the collection of Nilakantha Shastri "Thatte. So, it is looks like Nilakantha used Kamalākara's work against that of Gāgābhatta. Kamalākara also cites the story of the son of Citrasena's queen being saved by Dālbhya from being killed by Parasurāma, but seems to have taken the line rāmājnayā sa dālbhyena ksatradharmād bahiskrtah to mean that the child was deprived of his Ksatriyatva (Südrakamalākara, folios 89—90). The other point of interest seen in the Sûdrakamâlakara is that it discusses the question of the existence of Ksatriyas in the Kali age. It cites the famous verse saying that there are only two Varnas in the Kali age. However, it cites other verses saying that there are Ksatriyas and Vaisyas in the seed form even in the Kali age, and yet they have lost their dharma and have been reduced to the status of Südras (cf. pracchannarüpāh svakarmabhrastāh ksatriyā vaisyās ca santy eva kvacid ity asmatpitrcaranāh, Südrakamalākara, folios 93-94). It would appear that Gāgābhatta accepted the first argument about the seed-presence of the Ksatriyas in the Kali age, and tried to remedy their loss of dharma with purificatory vrâtya-stoma rite. On these points, Nāgesabhatta differed from Gāgābhatta, and Nāgesabhatta's views continued to influence his successors like Nilakantha Shastri Thane. 

Madhav M. Deshpande / Indo-Iranian Journal 55 (2010) 95—120 
child of the queen of Candrasena was a born Ksatriya, but was prohibited from carrying out specifically Ksatriya duties, but that did not take away his essential Ksatriyahood, and hence he was entitiled to a form of Upanayana. Nilakantha Shastri Thatte's opinions were not limited to his own views, 
they were in line with the arguments offered by large numbers of Brahmins from Satara, Vai and Pune, as seen from the documents (P.N. Patward 
han 1912), and hence collectively they represented a socially and politically powerful force against the defenders of the rights of the CKPs. 
Tracing the Lineage of Nīlakantha Sâstrī Hiatte to Nagesabhatta & Vaidyanātha 
While the role Nllakantha Shastri Thatte played in disputes against the sta tus of the CKPs and Sonars is richly documented by Wagle and others, there is another side to his personality that has largely remained untouched in the available research. Earlier I have noted the scholarly lineage of Nllakantha Shastri Thatte going back to Nigesa Bhatta. Nllakantha Shas tri went to Banaras, with the support of the Peshwa court, and studied with Nāgesabhattas disciple Vaidyanātha Pāyagunde. Nāgesa, Vaidyanâtha, and Vaidyanāthas son Bālambhatta, besides being great grammarians also wrote on many other Sàstras, including Dharmasâstra. The anti-CKP views of Nllakantha Shastri Thatte may have a far longer ancestry in the views of Nāgesabhatta, as well as in the views of Gāgābhatta's powerful uncle, Kamalikarabhatta. The most extensive argumentation against admitting the presence of pure Ksatriyas in the Kali age, and the ineligibility of the impure Ksatriya to purify themselves by undergoing an expiatory rite is offered in two Nirnaya texts that are attributed to Nāgesabhatta: Vrâtyatà prāyascittanirnaya (in Mahâ- and Laghu- versions), while a counter argu ment supporting the expiatory rights to purify the impure Ksatriyas is offered in the text of Vrātyatāsuddhisamgraha produced by the pandits at the court of Jayasimha in Rajasthan. A convenient summary of the main arguments is provided by the editor of these texts, NārāyanasāstrI Khiste, in his preface (pp. 1—2, translated from Sanskrit): 
The two versions of the Vrâtyatâpràyascittanirnaya {Mahdn and Laghu), even without any reference to the name of their author, are indubitably the works of Nāgesabhatta, since he is well known to have produced such smaller and larger [Laghu and Brhat] versions of his texts. The Vrâtyatâs'uddhisamgraha is composed by a group of pandits commissioned by Jayasimha. Both the ver sions of the Vrâtyatâpràyascittanirnaya begin with the question of the eligibil 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal 5} (2010) 95-120 
ity for Upanayana in the Kali age for those who know that no Upanayana was performed for ten generations in their family, and those for whom no earlier Upanayana is remembered either, and concludes that for such Ksatriyas (only in name), there can be no Upanayana rite. This is clearly stated by Nāgesa: "From the birth of Pariksit to the coronation of Nanda, these were the first fif 
teen hundred years of the Kali age, and there were genuine Ksatriyas on earth only for this duration. On the basis of this statement in the Visnupurāna, the absence of genuine Ksatriyas, worthy of Upanayana, in the rest of the Kali age is indicated." The other work, the Vrātyatāsuddhisamgraha, produced by (a group of) many scholars, determined with various arguments the existence of the Ksatriyas and their eligibility for Upanayana even in the Kali age. ... We (the editor) do not offer any opinion of our own. We have presented both of these sides in front of the scholars, and they can choose whichever they like depending upon acceptable grounds. 
While the editor claims neutrality in this debate, in the subsequent portion 
of the preface (ibid. p. 2), he claims that those pandits who were dependent upon Jayasimha for their livelihood produced the Vrātyatāsuddhisamgraha, having forgotten the true intent of the ancient Smrtis under the influence of wealth. On the other hand, wealth did not mean anything to Nāgesabhatta, whose sole concern was to protect the proper domain of the Sāstras, and he produced the Vrātyatāprāyascittanirnaya, following solely the path of the Sāstras, and disregarding the pressure from Jayasimha. "This is what we have heard from the older generations of Banaras." Nārāyanasāstri Khiste's statements in the preface show us how Nāgesabhatta's views were consid ered authoritative by the Maharashtrian Brahmins of Banaras, even after more than a century. We should note again that Nàràyana Shastri Thatte was a direct disciple of Vaidyanātha Pāyagunde, who was a direct disciple of Nāgesabhatta, and hence the influence of Nāgesabhatta's views on the views of Nàràyana Shastri Thatte cannot be underestimated. From the time of Shivaji to Pratapasinha of Satara, the constant effort of the Maratha lin eages was to establish their ancestry from the Rajput lineages of Rajasthan, and this was assumed to be a sufficient proof of Ksatriyahood. On the other hand, Nāgesabhatta's rejection of the right of Upanayana to Rajputs like Jayasimha of Jaipur and his blanket rejection of Upanayana to anyone other than a Brahmin in the Kali age represented a far extreme end of the Dharmasāstric spectrum.19 But even in this extreme view, Nāgesabhatta was 
19) P.V, Kane ( 1974: 3 81 ff.) cites the Vrātyatāprāyascittanirnaya and considers it as the work of Nâgesabhatta. Kane remarks on the extremity of Nâgesabhatta's opinion: "It must be stated that such views, though held by some rigidly orthodox writers of extreme views, were 


not alone. One has only to remember how the Sahyâdrikhanda narrative describes the curse of Parasurâma upon the 'wicked' Chitpavan Brahmins. One element of this curse is that they will serve Südras. This obviously looks like a reference to the Chitpavan Brahmins serving as Peshwas under the descendants of Shivaji. The fact that this narrative only curses Chitpavan Brahmins in this fashion, while Desastha Brahmins were already among the ministers of Shivaji, probably points to the period of the Peshwas for its composition, when the Chitpavan Brahmins begin to emerge as power ful players in Maratha history. So the author of the Sahyâdrikhanda, or of this section of it, whoever he was, regarded the Maratha rulers as Südras, even while he was expressing a curse upon the Chitpavan Brahmins.20 
Vaidyanatha Pāyagunde on Ksatriyas in the Kali Age 
What can we say about the views of Nārāyana Shastri Thatte's direct teacher, Vaidyanatha Pāyagunde? Here we get some indications from Vaidyanāthas commentary Prabhâ on Bhattoji Dlksitas Sabdakaustubha. On the passage brāhmanena niskārano dharmah sadango vedo 'dhyeyo jheyas ca from the Mahâbhâsya discussed in the Sabdakaustubha [Pt. I, p. 10], Vaidyanāthas commentary Prabhā reads: atra brāhmanenety uktyā 'nyayor evam adhyaya 
nam kâmyam eveti sücitam iti kascit tan na smrtyantaravirodhāpatteh / tasmāt traivarnikopalaksanam tat I ... yad va kalau ksatriyavisor abhâvât tatho ktam [BORI manuscript 62/1866-1868, Folio 38a].21 Here, two alternative 
not shared by most writers." Kane cites contrary opinions, though he seems to discount the historically attested strength of the views held by Nāgesa and manifested during the Peshwa period. 201 For an analysis of the Sahyâdrikhandœ and its historical context, see Deshpande (2002). 2" One sees the same views expressed in almost identical words in Vaidyanātha's com mentary Chāyā on Nāgesabhatta's Uddyota on Kaiyata's Pradipa on Patanjali's Mahābhāsya (Vyākarana-Mahābhāsya, Vol. I., p. 22). Here, Vaidyanātha cites an unnamed Smrti text: kalau na ksatriyâh santi kalau no vaisyajâtayah / brāhmanās caiva südrās ca kalau varnadvayam smrtam II. While Patanjali says that a Brahmin should study the Veda, the commentators try to figure out the implications of this statements. The Ratnaprakāsa of Sivarāmendrasarasvati (.Mahâbhàsya-Pradîpa-Vyàkhyânâni, Adhyāya 1, Pāda I Ahnika 1-4, p. 35) says that Patan jali's words indicate that the study of the Veda is not obligatory for the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas. This view is cited by Nāgesa in his Uddyota (Vyākarana-Mahābhāsya. Vol. I., p. 22). Commenting on this, Vaidyanātha first says that this view is not to his liking, since it contradicts other Smrtis that prescribe that all the three higher Varnas must study the Veda (atrārucibijam tayor nityādhyayanavidhāyakasmrtyantarādivirodhāpattir iti/ tasmâd brâhmanapadam traivarnikopalaksanam iti bodhyam). However, Vaidyanātha finally says that in fact there are no Ksatriyas and Vaisyas in the Kali age, and to suggest this Patan 

Madhav M. Deshpande / Indo-Iranian Journal S3 (2010) 9$-l2° X13 
explanations are presented. The first one says that someone has said that the passage "The Brahmin should study the Vedas" suggests that such a study is optional for the other two eligible Varnas, namely the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas. But such a view is not tenable, because it conflicts with other Smrtis. Therefore, the reference to the Brahmins is simply a pointer to the three higher Varnas. After this initial interpretation, Vaidyanâtha presents what appears to be his own understanding. It says that the original passage refers only to Brahmins studying the Vedas. This is because of the absence of the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas in the Kali age. Bālambhatta, Vaidyanāthas son, refers to the views of Nāgesabhatta as well as his own father, and says that his father also composed a work titled Kâyastha-nirnaya, which one can presume rejected the right of Upanayana to the Kayasthas.22 
Moderate Views of Kamalakarabhatta 
Ulis is certainly a more categorical rejection of the presence of the Ksatriyas in the Kali age, compared to what one finds in the Südrakamalākara of Kamalakarabhatta, who says that while pure Ksatriyas and Vaisyas do not exist in the Kali age, there certainly are in some places Ksatriyas and Vaisyas "hidden (unrecognizable?), fallen from their own religious duties" [pracchannarüpāh svakarmabhrastāh ksatriyā vaisyās ca santy eva kvacit ity asmat-pitrcaranāh, Südrakamalākara, folio 94]. Kamalākara not only asserts that such Ksatriyas and Vaisyas do exist in the Kali age, he says that this is also the view of his revered father Rimakrsna. Kamalakarabhatta, in his 
Nirnayasindhu, says that Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas, if they exceed the age-limits for their Upanayana, become Südras. Such a maximum age limit for a Brahmin is sixteen years. For a Ksatriya it is twenty-two years, and for a Vaisya it is twenty-four years [Manuh—à sodasād brāhmanasya sāvitri nâtivartate / ā dvāvimsāt ksatrabandhor ā caturvimsater visah // Jyotirni 
jali says that (only) Brahmins should study the Veda (vastutas tu kalau ksatriyavaisyayor abhāvam sücayitum tathoktam iti yathāsrutam eva tat sādhu). In his footnote on this passage in the Chāyā, the editor of the Mahābhāsya, Sivadatta Kudāla says that there is no reason to imagine that Patanjali is making a reference to the Kali-yuga, and hence it is appropriate to assume that his reference to Brahmins is inclusive of the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas. These passages are also discussed by C.V. Vaidya (1923: 96-97). 22) P.V. Kane (1975: 971) cites Bālambhatta on the views of his father, Vaidyanitha, on the question of Ksatriyas in the Kali age: tathâ ugrâdirûpaksatriyasattve 'pi tesâm na ksatriyatvam kim tu südratvam eveti gurucaranakrtavràtyapràyascittanirnaye spastam / tat a eva bodhyam / sphutīkrtam caitat pitrcaranaih kāyasthanirnaye. 


bandhe—agrajā bāhujā vaisyâh svāvadher ürdhvam abdatah / akrtopanayâh sarve vrsalā eva te smrtâh II, Nirnayasindhu, p. 262]. However, Kamlâkara's grandfather, and Gâgàbhatta's great grand-father, Nārāyanabhatta, in his work Dharmapravrtti, refers to those Brahmins, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas who exceed the maximum age limit allotted for their Upanayana, and says that they fall to Südra-hood and are excluded from all religious rites, UNLESS THEY PERFORM THE EXPIATORY RITE OF VRāTYASTOMA [ata Ürdhvam 
patanty ete sarvadharmabahiskrtāh / sāvitripatitā vrâtyà vrātyastomād rte 
kratoh, folio 51 ; sâvitripatitâyasya dosa varsânipanca va /sasikham vapanam krtvā vratam kuryāt samâhitah // ekavimsatirātram ca pibetprasrtiyāvakam / bhojayec ca havisyânnam brâhmanân sapta panca ca / tato yâvakasuddhasya tasyopanayanam smrtam II etad upanayanasys paramakālāt pürvakālejneyam/ ata ürdhvam vrātyastomah vrātyastomād rte krte nivacanât, Folio 145].23 What happens to those who have not had the Upanayana for many genera tions? This is the true point of departure. Gāgābhatta, taking cues from the works of his great grand father Nārāyanabhatta, and his uncle Kamalākara bhatta, offered expiation for such individuals. Seen in the context of the views of Nārāyanabhatta and Kamalākarabhatta, Gāgābhatta's further step does not appear to be excessively transgressive. 
Un the other hand, while admitting the presence ot such '"fallen Ksatri yas in the Kali age, Nāgesabhatta has categorically rejected their right to expiation and restoration to purity and attaining the right to Upanayana. It would appear that Vaidyanātha is even more categorical: There are no Ksatriyas and Vaisyas in the Kali age [kalau ksatriya-visor abhāvāt]. Now we can get a better sense of where Nllakantha Shastri Thatte may have derived his resolute opposition to admitting the Ksatriyahood of the CKPs and their right to Upanayana. He directly inherited such a view from Nāgesabhatta and Vaidyanātha, and then such a view was further encouraged by his asso ciation with Chintamanrao Patawardhan and Balajee Pant Natu, among others. 
231 The same expiation rites are prescribed for exceeding the age of Upanayana in the Dharmasindhusāra quoted in a footnote on the Nirnayasindhu of Kamalākara (p. 262): vrsald eveti / na cetprāyascittam anutisthantiti sesah H ata ùrdhvam patanty ete sarvadharmabahiskr tāh H sâvitrīpatità vrātyā vrātyastomād rte rtor iti yājnavalkya-vacanāt / āsodasād ity atra garbhādih samkhyā / tathā cajanmatabpaficadasavarsa-paryantam viprasya na visesatah prāya scittam /sodasavarse sasikhavapanam krtvā eka-vimsatirātram yāvakāsanam ante dvādasabrāh manabhojanam iti prāyascittam / sapta-dasādivarsesu krcchratrayādiprāyascittapürvakam upa nayanam bodhyam / iti dharma-sindhusāram / The opinion of Nārāyanabhatta's Dharmapra vrtti is echoed verbatim by Anantadeva in his Samskdrakaustubha (pp. 114-115, litho graphic edition, Bombay, 1861). Anantadeva was a close associate of Gāgābhatta in making decisions regarding the CKPs and Ksatriyas. Also see footnote 3. 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal (2010) 95—120 115 
Rājā: in the Absence of Ksatriyas? 
It would be interesting to see how the Brahmins who rejected the existence of the pure Ksatriyas and their eligibility to Upanayana and coronation justified the need to serve such kings in the role of ministers and advisors. Contradictory as it may appear, such indeed is the explicit approach of a number of Brahmin authorities on the Dharmasāstra in the seventeenth 
and the eighteenth centuries. First, let me refer to Bālambhatta Pāyagunde, the son of Vaidyanātha Pāyagunde, and contemporary of Nilakantha Shas tri Thatte. He is the author of the famous commentary Bâlambhattī on the Mitāksarā of Vijnānesvara on the Yâjnavalkya Smrti. Commenting on a quote from Manu, "A king desirous of taking care of the legal affairs along with Veda-knowing Brahmins and ministers should enter the court" [vyavahārān didrksus tu brāhmanaih saha pārthivah / mantrajnair mantri bhih sārdham vinītah praviset sabhām], the Bâlambhattī of Bālambhatta Pāyagunde [p. 5] says: pārthivah prthivīpatih ksatriyàd any ah api "The word 'king' refers to the ruler of the kingdom, even someone other than a 
Ksatriya." While Bālambhatta does not categorically reject the presence of the Ksatriyas in the Kali age, he is explicitly admitting that non-Ksatriyas 
can also become de facto kings, and in their capacity of being kings, they should be assisted by the Brahmins. Bālambhatta was not alone in holding this view. Kamalākarabhatta's cousin Nilakantha, the author of Vyavahāra mayûkha explains the word nrpa "king" [ Vyavahāramayükha, p. 2] in word ing reminding us of Bālambhatta: nrpah prajāpālanādhikrto yah kas'cit, na ksatriya eva "The word nrpa 'king' refers to whoever is in charge of protect ing the people, and is not restricted to a Ksatriya." Similar non-Ksatriya interpretations of the word rājā are found elsewhere in the Dharmasāstra literature [Dharmakosa, Vol. IV, Pt. II, pp. 780ff.; P.V. Kane 1973: 38-40]. On the other hand, we must contrast Gāgābhattas views on the same passages. These are found in his Dinakaroddyota Vyavahārakānda [manu script 37/1866-1868 at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, in 
Pune]. Citing the same verse of Manu: vyavahārān didrksus tu brāhmanaih saha pārthivah / mantrajnair mantribhis caiva vinītah praviset sabhâm //, Gāgābhatta says: "Only a properly consecrated king is entitled to look after the business of justice (vyavahâra). ... Even though the word rāja refers to a particular Jàti, and in Dharmasāstric passages, the word rāja often comes without any further specification, in those passages the word rāja refers to a Ksatriya who is properly consecrated, since only such a consecrated Ksatriya is entitled to look after justice" [vyavahāradarsane 


cābhisiktasya rājno dhikârah i râjâbhisekasamyukto brāhmano vā bahusrutah / dharmāsanagatah pasyed vyavahārān anulbanam iti prājāpatyukteh / ... yadyapi rājapadam jātivāci / rājnā sabhāsadah kāryāh ityādi bahusu vacanesu kevalarājasravanam ca / tathāpi tatra rājapadam abhisiktaksatriyaparam tad adhikārāt /, Dinakaroddyota, folios 7a—8].24 We don't know at this point when this work was composed in relation to Gāgābhatta's role at the court of Shivaji. However, it clearly expresses his view that only a properly con secrated Ksatriya is entitled to carry out the task of delivering justice. If this was his view, then one can assume that while rendering Dharmasāstric decisions for Shivaji, beginning in 1664 (cf. Syenavijātidharmanirnaya) and continuing right upto 1674 (cf. Kâyasthadharmadīpa), Gàgâbhatta was getting anxious about the proper Dharmasāstric authority of Shivaji. The evidence of the Syenavijātidharmanirnaya clearly shows that Gàgâbhatta, already since 1664, regarded Shahaji and Shivaji as born in a "pure royal family" (vimala-râja-kula) and as a de facto Ràjà. Sabhāsad Bakhar reports that it was Gàgâbhatta who suggested to Shivaji the idea of royal consecra tion, and this may indeed be a strong historical possibility. According to Sabhasad (pp. 78) Gàgâbhatta said that in his opinion, the Muslim kings sat on their throne and ruled with a royal umbrella. Shivaji on the other hand, who had defeated four sultans, had seventy-five thousand troops and had forts, had no throne. He stated that the Maratha Raja should become a Chattrapati "holder of the umbrella."25 Given his own Dharmasāstric views, Gàgâbhatta was most likely as anxious about having Shivaji prop erly consecrated, as Shivaji himself may have been about his own consecra tion. 
24) The Mackenzie Collection contains a manuscript of Gâgàbhatta's work titled Südro ddyota, Wilson (1828, p. 35). However, I have not yet been able to consult the contents of this manuscript. Wilsons catalogue of the Mackenzie Collection describes the contents of the manuscript as: "The rites and observances proper for the Südra caste by Gaga Bhatta of Maharashtra." This description would place this work in the same category as the Südrakamalākara of Kamalâkarabhatta and the Südrācārasiromani of Sesakrsna. It seems 
quite clear that Gāgābhatta was no modern reformist, out to abolish the caste system, in the image of Jotiba Phule or B.R. Ambedkar. The dispute was not over the legitimacy of the caste system as such, but about whether the traditional Dharmasāstra could be tweaked to find just enough space to recognize a de facto Rājā as a legitimate Ksatriya. 251 bhat gosāvi yāmce matem, musalmān pādsahā takti basavûn, chatra dharûn, pâtasàhī karitāt âni sivājtrāje yâmnīmhi cār pâtasàhī dabâvilyà âni pâùn lâkh gbodâ laskar gad kot asern asatâm tyàms takta ndhim. yâkaritâm marhâthâ rājā chatrapati vhâvâ asem cittdmt ânilem. Sabhâsad Bakhar, p. 78. For an analysis of the multiple accounts and explanations for Shivaji's coronation, see: Rajeev Raghavan (2007). 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal 5) (2010) 95-120 117 
On the other hand, the Mayükha of Nllakantha was treated as an author itative text on Dharmasāstric decisions during the late Peshwa period, and continued to be treated as such during the early British rule. It's teaching 
was supported by the British rulers in the British supported Poona Sanskrit Pāthasālā that opened in Pune after 1818. Many of the Sanskrit pandits who were appointed as teachers at this Pāthasālā, including the principal 
Rāghavācārya, were students of Nllakantha Shastri Thatte, and through this Pāthasālā, the influence of conservative Dharmasāstric views continued to 
hold sway among the Poona Brahmins, even after the fall of the Peshwa. The role of Nllakantha Shastri Thatte can be better understood within such a fuller historical context. 
References 
Abhyankar, K.V. 1954. Vyākarana-Mahābhāsya of Patanjali, with the Marathi translation by Vasudevashastri Abhyankar. Pt. 7. Prastāvanā Khanda ["Intro ductory Volume"]. Poona: Deccan Education Society. Abhyankar, VāsudevasāstrI. 1929. Dharmatattvanirnaya. Anandāsrama Sanskrit 
Series, no. 98. Poona: Anandāsrama Aitihàsika Patravyavahāra, edited by G.S. Sardesai, K.P. Kulkarni, and Y.M. Kale. 
1933. Poona: S.R. Sardesai. Apte, B.K. (ed.). 1974-1975. Chhatrapati Shivaji Coronation Tercentenary Com 
memoration Volume. Bombay: University of Bombay. Apte, D.V. (ed.). 1948. (Marathi). Mahdrāstra Itihdsa Manjiri. ist edn. 1923, 2nd 
edn. 1948. Pune: Chitrashala Press. 
, 1935. (Marathi). "Sārasvatāmce Brāhmanatva", in the Quarterly of the Bharata Itihasa Samshodhana Mandala, Vol. XV, No. 4, pp. 2-3. Apte, D.V. and Oturkar, R.V. 1941, revised 2nd edn. 1963. (Marathi). Sādhana 
Paricaya arthāt Mahārāstrācā [Marāthyāncā] Patrarûpa Itihdsa. Pune: Anatha Vidyarthi Griha Prakashan. Chhatrapati Srisivaprabhûce Caritra, the Bakhar by Krsnājl Ananta Sabhâsad, ed. 
by V.S. Vakaskar. 1957. Poona: Venus Prakashan. Chitnis, Malhar Ramrao. Sakakarte Sri Siva Chatrapati Maharaja [alias Citnīs 
Bakhar\. Edited by K.N. Sane. 1924. Poona. Copland, Ian. 1973. "The Maharaja of Kolhapur and the Non-Brahmin Movement 
1902-1910." In Modern Asian Studies, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 209-225. Deshpande, Madhav. 2002. "Panca-Gauda und Panca-Drāvida. Umstrittene 
Grenzen einer traditionellen Klassifikation." In Arier und Draviden, edited by Michael Bergunder and Rahul Peter Das. Neue Hallesche Berichte-2, pp. 57-78. 2002. Halle: Verlag der Franckeschen Stiftungen. Deshpande, P.N. 1983. (Marathi). Chatrapati Sivāji Mahārājāmci Patre. Dhule: 
Sushama Prakashan. 

Madhav M. Deshpande / lndo-Iranian Journal 5} (2010) 95—120 
Dharmakosa, Vol. IV, Pt. II. Râjanītikânda. Ed. by Laxmanshastri Joshi. 1973. Vai, 
Maharashtra: Prājna Pāthasālā Mandala. Dharmapravrtti, by Nārāyanabhatta. Manuscript No: 109/ofVishrama (New No. 
26). Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Dinakaroddyota (Vyavahārakānda), by Gâgâbhatta, alias Visvesvara Pandita. Man uscript No: 37/1866-1868. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Gode, P.K. 1956. "The Date of the Kāyasthaparabhüdharmādarsa of Nīlakantha 
Süri and Identification of its Author in contemporary Records." In Studies in Indian Literary History, Vol. III. Poona: Prof. P.K. Gode Collected Works Publication Committee. 
Gune, Vitthal Trimbak. 1953. The Judicial System oftheMarathas. Deccan College 
Dissertation Series: 12. Pune: Deccan College. Gupte, Keshav Trimbak. 1919. Rājavādyāmci Gâgâbhattī. Pune: Cândrasenīya 
Kāyastha Prabhu Aitihāsika Mandajī. Gupte, Tryambak Vasudeva. 1904. Ethnographical Notes on Chandrasenîya Kāyastha 
Prabhu. Poona: Chandraseniya Kayastha Prabhu Social Club. 
, 1912. CândrasenīyaKâyasthaPrabhu GrāmanyaPrakaranātilPācAssalAjnā patre. Poona: Cândrasenīya Kāyastha Prabhu Aitihâsik Mandalī. Kane, P.V. 1973. History of Dharmasāstra, Vol. III, second edition. Poona: Bhan 
darkar Oriental Research Institute. 
, 1974. History of Dharmasāstra, Vol. II, Pt. I, second edition. Poona: Bhan darkar Oriental Research Institute. 
-, 1975. History of Dharmasāstra, Vol. I, Pt. II, second edition. Poona: Bhan darkar Oriental Research Institute. 
Kāyasthaparabhüdharmādarsa, by Nīlakantha Sâstrī Thatte. Limaye Collection. 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Kulkarni, A.R. 1996. "Satī in the Maratha Country: An Historical Perspective." In Images of Women in Maharashtrian Literature and Religion, pp. 171-198. Edited by Anne Feldhaus. New York: SUNY Press. 
, 2000. "The Shastri Tradition of Pune in the Nineteenth Century," In Maharashtra: Society and Culture, pp. 181-202. New Delhi: Books and Books. Kulkarni, Sumitra 1995. Satara Raj, 1818—1848: A Study in History, Administration and Culture. New Delhi: Mittal Publications. Mahābhāsya-Pradipa-Vyākhyānāni, Adhyāya 1, Pāda 1, Ahnika 1-4. Edited by 
M.S. Narasimhacharya. 1973. Pondichéry: Institut Français D'Indologie. Nayak, Shamrao Moroji. 1877. A History of the Pattana Prabhus. Bombay (no 
publisher specified). Nirnayasindhu, by Kamalākarabhatta, with a Marâthī translation by Krishnashastri 
Navare. 2nd edition. 1935. Bombay: Nirnayasagara Press. O'Hanlon, Rosalind. 1983. "Maratha History as Polemic: Low Caste Ideology and 
Political Debate in Late Nineteenth Century Western India." In Modern Asian Studies, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 1-33. 
, 1985. Caste, Conflict and Ideology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Oturkar, R.V. (ed.) 1950. (Marathi). Pesave kālina Sāmājika va Arthika Patra 
Vyavahāra. Pune: Bhārata Itihāsa Samsodhaka Mandala. 

Madhav M. Deshpande /Indo-Iranian Journal5) (2010) 9$—120 119 
Patwardhan, P.N. 1912. Prabhuprakarani don nivàdpatre, in Bhārata-Itihāsa-Sam 
sodhaka-Mandala-Ahavāl, Sake 1834 [= 1912x0], pp. 93—98. Poona: Bharata Itihasa Samshodhaka Mandala. 
Pawar, Appasaheb. 1985. Rajarshi Shahu Chhatrapati Papers: ipoo—ipop- Vedokta 
Controversy. Kolhapur: Shahu Research Institute Pimputkar, R.S. 1926. (Marathi). Citalebhattaprakarna. Mumbai: Ganesh Sada 
shiv Joshi Prabhâ, commentary by Vaidyanātha Pâyagunde, on Bhattoji Dīksita's Sabdakau stubha. Manuscript 62/1866—1868, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Raghavan, Rajeev. 2007. Distortions of the Past: The Historiography ofShivaji's Coro 
nation. MA.. Thesis. Unpublished. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan. Rājadharmakaustubha, by Anantadeva. Edited by Mahamahopadhyaya Kamala Krishna Smrititirtha. Gaekwad's Oriental Series, No. LXXII. 1935. Baroda. Sabhāsad-Bakhar, or SriSivaprabhùce Caritra, by Krishnaji Anant Sabhasad. 1957. 
Edited by V.S. Vakaskar. Poona: Venus Prakashan. Sardesai, G.S, Kulkarni, K.P. and Kale, Y.M. (editors). 1933. (Marathi). Aitihdsika 
Patravyavahàra. Pune: Samarth Bharat Press. Shejwalkar, T.S. 1964. (Marathi). Samkalpita Sivacaritrâcī Prastâvanâ, Arâkhadâ, 
va Sâdhane. Mumbai: Maratha Mandira. 
Sris'ivadigvijaya, edited by R.C. Dhere. 1975. Pune: Anmol Prakashan. Srisivarājyābhisekaprayoga, by Gāgābhatta. Edited by T.G. Mainkar. In B.K. Apte 
(1974-1975). Südrācārasiromani, by Sesakrsna, ed. by Nārāyana Sâstrî Khiste. The Princess of 
Wales Saraswati Bhavana Texts, No. 44. 1933. Banaras. Südrakamalākara, by Kamalākarabhatta. Ed. by Ganesh Bapuji Malvankar and Vishnu Bapuji Bapat. Saka 1783, i86iad Bombay. [Photocopy from Widener Library, Harvard University: Ind L 1525.8. F]. Syenavijātidharmanirnaya, published in "Sivakālina Sāstri va Pandita", Vārsika Itivrtta, 1913 (Sake 1835), pp. 293-305. Pune: Bharata Itihasa Samshodhaka Mandala. 
Thakare, Keshav Sitaram. 1919. (Marathi). Grāmanyācā Sādyanta Itihasa. Mum 
bai: Yashwant Shivram Raje. [Microfilm: Center for Research Libraries, Chi cago, 1997]. Thatte-Kula-Vrttānta. Edited and published by Parashuram Vinayak Thatte and 
Vishvanath Narayan Thatte. 1936. Pune: Jnānavilāsa Press. Vad, Ganesh Chimnaji. 1911. Selections from the Satara Raja's and the Peshwa's 
Diaries, Vol. 8, Section 3. Selections from the Diaries ofSawai Madhavrao Peshwa. Pune: Deccan Vernacular Translation Society. Vaidya, C.V. 1923. Madhyayugin Bhārat, Part 2, Hindu Râjydcâ Utkarsa, arthāt, 
Rajaputāmcā Prārambhicā Itihās. Pune: Published by the author. Visnupuràna, edited and translated into Hindi by Munilal Gupta. 1934. Gorakh 
pur: Gitapress. Vrātyatāprāyascittanirnaya, by Nāgesabhatta. Edited by Narayan Shastri Khiste and Jagannath Shastri Hoshing. 1927. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, No. 366. Banaras: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office. 


Vrātyatāsuddhisarngraha, cornissioned by jayasimha. xiditea Dy Narayan snastri 
Khiste and Jagannath Shastri Hoshing. 1927. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, No. 366. Banaras: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office. Vydkarana-Mahdbhdsya, by Patanjali, with Kaiyata's Pradipa, Nāgesabhatta's Uddy ota, and notes collected from Vaidyanâthas Chāyā, Haradatta's Padamanjari, and Bhattoji Dîksita's Sabdakaustubha. Volume I, Navihnika. Edited by Siva datta D. Kudāla. 1917. Mumbai: Nirnayasagara Press. Vyavahdra-Bdlambhatti, commentary by Bālambhatta Pāyagunde, on the Mitdk 
sard, edited by Nityananda Panta Parvatiya. 1912. Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, no. 173. Banaras. Vyavahdramayùkha, by Nilakantha. Edited byJ.R. Gharpure. 1914. Bombay: pub lished by J.R. Gharpure at the Office of The Collections of Hindu Law Texts. Wagle, Narendra K. 1980. "A Dispute between the Pancal Devajna Sonars and 
the Brahmanas of Pune regarding Social Rank and Ritual Privileges: A Case Study of the British Administration of Jati Laws in Maharashtra, 1822-1825." In Images of Maharashtra, A Regional Profile of India, pp. 129-159, ed. by N.K. Wagle. London and Dublin: Curzon Press. 
, 1982. "The Cāndrasenlya Kāyastha Prabhus and the Brahmans: Ritual, Law and Politics in Pune 1789-1790." In Indo logy and Law, Studies in Honour of Pro fessor J. Duncan M. Derrett, pp. 303-328. Edited by Günter-Dietz Sontheimer and Parameswara Kota Aithal. Beitrāge zur Südasienforschung, Südasien-Institut, Universitāt Heidelberg, Band 77. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag. 
-, 1987. "Ritual and Change in Early Nineteenth Century Society in Maha rashtra: Vedokta Disputes in Baroda, Pune and Satara, 1824-1838." In Religion and Society in Maharashtra, edited by Milton Israel and N.K. Wagle. South Asian Studies Papers, No. 1. Toronto: University of Toronto, Centre for South Asian Studies. 
, 1998. "Women in the Kotwal Papers, Pune 1767-1791." In Images of Women in Maharashtrian Society, pp. 15-60, edited by Ann Feldhaus. New York: SUNY Press. 
-, 1999. Writers, Editors, and Reformers: Social and Political Transformations of Maharashtra, 1830—1930. Delhi: Manohar Publishers. 
2000. "The Government, the Jāti and the Individual: Rights, discipline and control in the Pune Kotwal Papers, 1766-1794." In Contributions to Indian Sociology (n.s.), Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 321-360. Wilson, H.H. 1828. (editor). Mackenzie Collection. A Descriptive Catalogue of the 
Oriental Manuscripts, Vol. I. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

