 Volume 15 (2008), Issue 2 
On the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, Brahman Migrations, and Brāhmī Paleography (For Frits Staal) 
by Thennilapuram P. Mahadevan 
ISSN 1084-7561 
http://dx.doi.org/10.11588/ejvs.2008.2.327 
1 
Thennilapuram P. Mahadevan Department of English Howard University Washington D.C. 20059 thennilapuram.mahadevan@gmail.com 
On the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, Brahman Migrations, 
and Brāhmī Paleography 
(For Frits Staal) 
Introduction 
It is well-known that the Mahābhārata has come down to us in two recensions, 
the Northern and the Southern. The editors of the Poona Critical Edition (1933-70)1 of 
the epic determined, in the process of collating and isolating the archetype of the epic, 
that its Northern Recension (NR) constitutes in general what is called in textual 
scholarship the editio simplicior, the naive or the original text, and they created the 
Critical Edition (CE) from the irreducible archetype of the NR texts, the Śārada codex of 
the Kashmir region in the northwest of South Asia. They found likewise that the 
Southern Recension (SR) was generically an editio ornatio, an ornate text, a version 
made consciously and systematically: all hundred Kaurava brothers get named, all but a 
few with the pejorative du prefix; the 18 parvans of NR rise to 24 in the SR, with many 
insertions and transpositions of crucial episodes within parvans (those of Śakuntalā and 
Yayāti, for example, in the Ādiparvan); further, the SR is overlaid with a Brahmanical 
ideology, already incipient in the NR. 
Of even greater interest was their discovery that the Malayalam version of the SR 
texts was itself an editio simplicior, albeit of the SR-ornatio text: it was the shortest of 
2 
the SR texts which included the Telugu-Grantha versions of the SR tradition. It also 
aligned itself with the Śārada version of the NR texts. This made no geographical sense, 
as was noticed forthrightly by V.S.Sukthankar, the life spirit behind the CE.2 Logically, 
when a text radiates over a wide area, the versions at the farthest belts of radiation tend to 
be at greatest variance with the founding text, more so, than those in the inner belts: we 
see this in the eastward radiation of the Śārada text, the first formation of Sukthankar’s γ- 
sub-recension (Sukthankar 1933: lxxiii; see below, Section A, for Sukthankar’s master 
chart of recensions and versions) and the North-Eastern versions in Nepali, Maithili, and 
Bengali scripts. By a similar logic for the southward radiation of the epic along the well 
traveled and traditional dakṣiṇāpatha as the transmission route,3 the Malayalam version, 
being at the outermost extent of the Mahābhārata radiation, should also be far more 
differentiated than those, like the Tamil (Grantha) and Telugu versions, in the intervening 
space. Yet it was the shortest of the Southern Recension texts, being to it what the 
Śārada codex was to the NR (Dandekar 1961 [XI]: xlix). More anomalously, the 
Malayalam version was also found to align itself regularly with the Śārada text, “a fact all 
the more impressive because M[alayalam], a Southern version, hails from the province at 
the opposite end of India from the province of Ś[ārada], a Northern version” (Sukthankar 
1933 [I]: lxxiv)—indeed, across the vast buffer zone of the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu 
version of the SR Mahābhārata tradition between itself and the Northern Recension 
texts. In fact, some of the grossest inflations of the text and thus possibly the latest are 
found to occur in the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu versions (see below). 
The preparation of the CE of the Mahābhārata was not contingent on solutions to 
these anomalies, so we have a consensus Critical Edition of the text, but I believe that the 
3 
seeming anomalies right themselves out, opening thereby a way to a correct assessment 
of the textual history of the SR text of the epic and perhaps the Mahābhārata tradition 
itself, if we approach the entire problem from the perspective of Brahman migrations to 
the south, the irreducible human agency that brought Sanskrit texts—oral or literate—to 
peninsular India through the dakṣiṇāpatha. As we will see, all the Mahābhārata 
manuscripts that went to Poona [Pune] from peninsular India were from Brahman centers 
of learning, or facilities with intimate links to Brahman communities of the area. The 
textual history and transmission of the epic are thus inextricably intertwined with the 
Brahman migrations to the south. We will also see that the Mahābhārata passes on to 
non-Brahman groups in time, both in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, to form staples of the 
kūṭiyāṭṭam and kathakaḷi repertories in the former and that of the kūttu repertory in the 
latter, but there can be little doubt that its first migrations to South India were in Brahman 
hands. 
In on-going work,4 I show that two distinct waves of Brahmans arrived in the 
Tamil-Kerala country in the pre-modern period from the Vedic regions of Northern India, 
adhering to two separate śrauta praxises, the first wearing their traditional hair tuft-- 
kuṭumi in Tamil--in front and thus collectively known as Pūrvaśikhā, and the second, 
Aparaśikhā, wearing it toward the back, as a pony tail (See Illustrations A and B 
respectively).5 I address below the question if other Brahmans or Brahman groups 
arrived in the Tamil country for our historical period, 50 BCE to 1350 CE. We will see 
that only these two Brahmans groups can be linked to srautism, and thus to a Vedic 
home, extant or in epigraphy. Moreover, as we will see, between them, they exhaust all 
4 
the Brahman groups of the area in Thurston (1909), our most important ethnographic 
source of Brahman groups. 
My specific thesis with respect to the Brahman migrations of the two groups and 
the epic is that what Sukthankar isolates as the Śārada text, his archetype for the epic and 
basis for the CE of Mahābhārata epic or a text very close to it, say *Śārada version, came 
to the Tamil country with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans by the beginnings of the Common 
Era (CE): these Brahmans with their fronted tuft are well attested in the Sangam poetry, 
ca. 50 BCE to 250 CE, and they created from the *Śārada text what has come down to us 
as SR in the first four or five centuries of CE. I will designate this *Pūrvaśikhā text of 
the SR of the Mahābhārata. This *Śārada text present in the Sangam Tamil country, 
being made in the first half of the millennium CE into the *Pūrvaśikhā SR text, supplied 
the knowledge of the epic displayed in the poetry of the Sangam anthologies, these 
perhaps being composed simultaneously with the *Pūrvaśikhā text, the basis perhaps 
even for a Sangam Era translation of the epic, Perutēvanār’s lost Pāratam.6 At the close 
of the Sangam period of Tamil history, brought about by the Kaḷabhra Interregnum, ca. 
4th to 7th CE, a far-reachingly disruptive moment in Tamil history, a branch of the 
Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans moved to the Malabar region of Kerala, later the historical 
Nambudiri Brahmans of Kerala, through the Palghat gaps, a travel route already in long 
use,7 with the *Pūrvaśikhā text, the text remaining there in relative isolation till 1920’s 
when summoned to Poona for the CE. Further, the *Pūrvaśikhā text remained behind in 
the Tamil country as well with the rump Pūrvaśikhā group, the historically Tamil- 
speaking Śōḻiya Brahmans, the formative Brahman component of the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism in 
7-9th centuries CE and thus transfusing the Kṛṣṇa myths of the Mahābhārata, especially 
5 
from its khila (or appendix) portions, the Harivaṃśa, into the emerging Vaiṣṇava Bhakti 
poetry. 
I will be designating this the Σ-text: it is still an SR text and is identical to the text 
that went to Malabar with the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, but I have designated a Greek 
letter for it as it will host Sukthankar’s σ-text (see Section A below for Sukthankar’s 
master chart of the epic’s different recensions and script-based versions): the σ-text is an 
imaginary text he constructs from the evidence in the manuscripts that came to Poona for 
collation purposes. He sees that all Grantha-Telugu versions of the epic were of the SR 
mould, but unlike the Malayalam version of the SR with its allegiance to the *Śārada text 
of the NR tradition, the Grantha-Telugu texts’ allegiance lies with a longer, inflated 
version of NR, part of the γ-family of texts. The SR mould in this complex is my Σ-text, 
the *Pūrvaśikhā text resident in the Tamil country after the departure of the Nambudiri 
Pūrvaśikhās to Malabar through the Palghat gaps and finding itself hosting the arrival of 
the Aparaśikhā Brahmans and their NR σ-text. The SR-NR admixture seen in the 
Grantha-Telugu versions—an SR mould but with great infusions of métier, what comes 
to be called “excesses” of the SR text, from an NR text-- is one of the more direct proofs 
in support of the thesis advanced here: Sukthankar’s hypothetical σ-text, derived by him 
entirely from textual evidence of his manuscripts, is verified by the evidence from the 
Brahman migrations. 
I would be suggesting that this text came with the second Brahman group of my 
study, beginning to arrive at the upper peninsular regions from 5th century CE onward, 
reaching the Tamil country proper in significant numbers by 8th CE. Their arrival in the 
Tamil country is one of the best documented instances of large scale migrations of people 
6 
anywhere in pre-modern history. Elsewhere I characterize them as the Burton Stein 
Brahmans, after the historian’s path-breaking analysis of their pivotal role in the history 
Tamil Nadu from the pre-modern times to the modern period although his extreme stress 
on local autonomy, as a segmentary feature of the Cōḷa state, has been questioned and 
moderated (Karashima 1984; Champakalakshmi 2001).8 The Pallavas (4th to 10th 
centuries, CE), later the Cōḻas (10th-14th centuries CE) and the subsequent Pāṇṭiya and 
Nāyaka kingdoms, are their patrons, and they constitute the subject of the famous 
Pallava-Cōḷa Copper Plate epigraphy, with every immigrant’s name, the number of shares 
of the land granted to his family, his Veda śākha in the form of its sūtra, his gotra, his 
titles of Vedic learning, and in the most elaborate deeds, his place of domicile before 
arrival in the Tamil country recorded in copper plates that regularly turned up at the 
tilling of the paddy fields of the Tamil country throughout 20th century. The initial deeds 
show them settling in the north and north-east parts of the Tamil country, the 
Tonṭaimanṭalam area and its northern outskirts in the Vēnkata hills and what is southern 
Andhra Pradesh today, and later deeds, the Kaveri delta. Their places of domicile before 
arrival in the Tamil country are, in most cases, villages in southern Andhra Pradesh, but 
these Brahmans as a whole are traceable from their Śrauta Sūtra traditions ultimately to 
the Mathurā region of the Yamunā river (see below). And these show them to be 
following different śrauta traditions from those of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans. 
A stemma chart of the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata epic would look like this: 
*Sārada Text (ca. 150 BCE) ¦ *Pūrvaśikhā Text (ca. 50 BCE-500 CE) 
Nambudiri *Pūrvaśikhā text------------ -׀---------*Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhā text (Σ-text) 
7 
(Malayalam version [500-1920’s CE]) ׀ ׀ ׀----------*Suktankar’s σ-text 
׀ ׀-------Tamil and Telugu versions (>500-1920’s CE) 
I seek below to correlate the above stemma chart of the SR, first with its putative 
agents, the Brahmans and their migrations to the peninsular region from their Vedic 
homelands, and secondly with the requisite paleography for the literate transcriptions of 
the texts. We will see that the findings presented here in terms of the relevant human 
agency and script substantially extend our current understanding of the rise of the 
Mahābhārata tradition. The communis opinio of our ideas about this may be reduced to 
what may be called the Hiltebeitel-Witzel model: the Hiltebeitel (2001; 2005) part of the 
model addressing issues relating to the literate redaction of the epic by a human agency, 
an inter- or trans-generational “committee of out of sorts Brahmans,” ca. 150 BCE and 
the Witzel (2005) half providing a possible venue for this textualization event in the 
reformist Hindu-Vedic kingdom, like the Śuṅga dynasty, promoting the Vedic traditions, 
possibly the core métier of the epic deriving from a Vedic event, the Ten King’s Battle 
referred to at ṚV 7.18.5-10; 33. 3, 5. The work presented here may be said to address the 
default conclusions from this model: can we characterize the Brahmanical redactorial 
agency with any historical precision? What script aided the redactorial process, and what 
might have been the physical manuscript aiding the textualization? Further, I address 
how this nascent text, what I have designated as *Śārada text, came to the south by the 
Sangam age serving as a template for the creation of the first SR text, the *Pūrvaśikhā 
8 
text, thus explaining the anomalies of the textual history of the SR listed above from 
Sukthankar. 
In sum, then, a version of the epic close to the Śārada text, *Sarada text, leaves 
North India sometime after its redaction, ca.250-150 BCE, with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans 
in a *Southern Brāhmī script9, most likely the parent of the extant Grantha script, in palm 
leaf manuscript or birch bark.10 The SR of the epic is forged from this in the following 
half-millennium, reaching a final form by 500 CE, the *Pūrvaśikhā text, the Grantha 
script taking shape in the process, the palm leaves of South India with the iron stylus 
technology of writing serving the transcription. About this time, both the text and script 
go to the Malabar area of Kerala with one branch of the Pūrvaśikhā group which emerges 
in time as the historical Nambudiri group, and goes into seeming hibernation for the next 
1500 years till summoned to Poona for the preparation of the CE. This is the text that 
came to Poona in the 20th century, in the 1920’s, which the CE editors found to be the 
shortest version of the SR texts and thus anomalous. 
What has not been recognized is that the *Pūrvaśikhā text (the Σ-text in my 
designation; see below for more details) remains with the rump Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhā group 
in the Tamil country, playing a far more active role in the subsequent history of the 
peninsular region. It shapes the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism, emerging in the centuries following 
the Kaḷabhra Interregnum, all four Brahman Āḻvārs being by tradition Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās. 
It also hosts the σ-Aparaśikhā text as it arrives in the Tamil country ca. 8th century 
onward and shapes the subsequent textual history of the epic in the Tamil country, 
resulting in the Tamil and Telugu versions. I present these findings in the following 
sequence: 
9 
Section A sets forth the relevant details of the epic in its different recensions and 
versions. 
Section B is concerned with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans under the following 
aspects: i. the origins of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, their śrauta traditions, and 
their migration southward. 
ii. their presence in the Sangam Tamil country and the creation of the 
*Pūrvaśikā text of the Mahābhārata. 
iii. the Kaḷabhra Interregnum and the dispersal of the Pūrvaśikhā 
group. 
iv. the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās and *Pūrvaśikhā text in the Malabar 
area of the emerging Kerala. 
v. the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās, the *Pūrvaśikhā text, and the Āḻvār 
Vaiṣṇavism. 
vi. the *Pūrvaśikhā text and the Poona Critical Edition 
Section C examines the Aparaśikhā Brahmans and their bearing on the textual 
history of the Mahābhārata: 
i. the origins of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, their Śrauta traditions and 
their arrival in the Tamil country. 
ii. the Pallava period epigraphy about the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. 
iii. the Cōḷa period epigraphy about the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. 
iv. the emergence of the Aparaśikhā Śrīvaiṣṇavism in its Ācārya 
phase. 10 
v. the Tamil and Telugu versions of the Mahābhārata. 
vi. the Tamil and Telugu Mahābhārata and the Poona Critical Edition. 
In Section D, I provide further proof for the above from the history of the Tamil- 
Malayalam paleography as has been constructed by I. Mahadevan (2003): 
i. Introduction and an over-view of Mahadevan’s findings 
ii. the Tamil Brāhmī script and its history 
iii. the Southern Brāhmī script and its history 
iv. the Brahmans, the epics and paleography 
* * * * * * * 
Section A: The Mahābhārata Epic and Its Recensions 
I start with Sukthankar’s master chart of the recensional history for the epic as a whole: 
Vyāsa’s Bhārata 
| Ur-Mahābhārata __________________|________________________ | | | | ______N___________ S | | | υ γ | _____ ||_____ _____ |______ _____ |______ | | | | | | Śārada K ε Devanāgarī | | 
| σ Malayalam ______|______ ______|______ | | | | | Nepalī Maithili Bengali Telugu Grantha 
11 
The Vyāsa phase of the epic, the so called Jaya Bhārata, began perhaps in an oral 
tradition, by consensus in the Kuru area, and most likely in the kṣatriya circles, as a lay 
about war for land and territory, perhaps based on the Ten King Battle of the Ṛgveda 
(Witzel 2006: 21-24). By the Gṛhya Sūtra period—considerably later than the Śrauta 
Sūtra period, as Oldenberg has shown, thus perhaps 500-300 BCE11—a Mahābhārata has 
come into existence, the Gṛhya Sūtra passages linking it with the primary, inner circle of 
redactors, Sumantu, Jaimini, Vaiśmpāyana, and Paila (omitting Śuka, however).12 
Perhaps this marks the first “possession” of the epic by the Brahmans, that of the inner 
frame, a process seen much more deepened in the outer frame, unfolding as a discourse in 
the sadas of a Śrauta ritual of the Sattra type, with Vyāsa himself present in the sadas and 
claiming for itself subsequently the status of the Fifth Veda. It is possible that the śrauta 
device of the outer frame reflects the real-life setting of Hiltebeitel’s intergenerational 
Brahman committee, engaged in srauta rituals and redaction of the epic at the same time 
in one of the new reformist Brahman kingdoms, like the Śuṅga, its Brahman king 
Puṣyamitra performing two aśvamedhas and committed to the promotion of Śrautism.13 
Plausible links, as we will see below, can be surmised, between the first group of 
Brahmans of this study and this original redaction. There is general consensus that the 
epic passes into literacy by this stage, by 300-100 BCE when the Brāhmī script had taken 
shape in North India, providing the Sanskrit sound system a syllabary, devised, as its 
separation of the vowel and consonant sounds into two classes shows, by the Vedic oral 
tradition and its svādhyāya institutions.14 
With the NR and SR phases, we are on firmer ground, what Sukthankar 
characterizes as the “incontrovertible fact” (1933: [I] xxxi) about the early history of the 
12 
epic: they are the two broad and distinct recensions of the epic, each with further different 
versions later in regional languages. The NR text first breaks into two large families, the 
ν-and the γ-family texts, the former in the Kuru realm, the area of the origin of the epic, 
and the latter, an inflated version in the Magadha realm, in the eastern parts of North 
India, in Bihar, Nepal and Bengal. The shorter ν–family of the Kuru-Pāñcāla area gives 
us the Śārada text, the basis of the Poona CE. 
We have no information in Sukthankar about how exactly the SR rises or is found 
in the peninsular region in terms of a human agency or other irreducible correlates— 
script, the physical form of the manuscript. All the same, however, from the evidence of 
his manuscripts, Sukthankar is able to affirm that its appearance can be dated to a 
“primitive” ([1927]1933 [I]: Forward vi) moment in the textual history of the epic. 
Noticing the concord in the Ādiparvan between the Kāṣmīrī version of the NR and the SR 
texts, Sukthankar notes, “Since I have not been able to discover any traces of “secondary 
interrelationship” between archetypes K [NR] and S [SR], I consider the agreement 
between these two archetypes as “primitive,” that is depending upon their primitive 
connection through the Ur-Mahābhārata” (Sukthankar’s quote marks; my parenthetical 
gloss)--a concord, further, he sees to be of “supreme importance for the reconstruction of 
the text” ([1927] 1933:[I] Forward vi-vii).15 We should note that the “primitive” accord 
between the NR and SR texts, so phrased in his 1927 Forward by Sukthankar, becomes 
the “impressive fact” (1933 [I]: lxxiv) of the recensional history of the epic in the 1933 
Prolegomena, in view of the antipodal locations of the two texts, the NR in Kashmir and 
the SR in Kerala, and we should further note that the picture of the Brahman migration 
presented below adequately explains this anomaly. 
13 
The SR, having thus risen at an early moment in the history of the epic, 
differentiates essentially into two versions, the shorter Malayalam text, that came to the 
Poona editors from the Malabar region of Kerala and the longer, inflated Grantha-Telugu 
version, the latter forming from an interaction between Sukthankar’s theoretical σ text 
and the resident Σ-SR text, the σ text being an NR version (not indicated to be so in 
Sukthankar’s chart but made abundantly clear in his Prolegomena to the Ādiparvan) and 
coming to Poona from the Tanjavur area of Tamil Nadu. 
Thus, Sukthankar noted, “all textual criticism of the Mahābhārata begins with 
this incontrovertible fact that the text of the Great Epic has come down to us in two 
divergent forms, a Northern and a Southern recension, texts typical of the Āryāvarta and 
Dakṣināpatha” (xxxi). Yet this is an issue scarcely addressed in the Mahābhārata 
scholarship since the publication of the CE (1933-1970). The 18-parvan division of the 
NR increases to 24 in the SR, the SR being almost a Virgilian response to the Homeric 
NR, characterized by “precision, schematization, and thoroughly practical outlook” 
(xxxvi; Sukthankar’s italics) compared to the NR version which is “distinctly vague, 
unsystematic, and sometimes even inconsequent, more like a story naively told, as we 
find in actual experience” (xxxvi; Sukthankar’s italics). Sukthankar noted further that 
“there persists throughout, between the recensions, a distinct and undeniable family 
resemblance, and there cannot be the slightest doubt that both spring from a common 
source, albeit a distant and somewhat nebulous source” (xxxvi), remarking in addition 
that “even in its early phases the Mahābhārata text tradition must have been not uniform 
and singular, but multiple and polygenous” (Forward: i). 
14 
That is, the longer and ornate SR text rises at an early moment in the textual 
history of the epic—a finding echoed further by Belvalkar (1947: lxiv)16, the other CE 
editor with an equal breadth of experience with the Mahābhārata manuscripts. However, 
the inflation does not seem to have been the inherent result of the dynamics of an oral 
tradition;17 that is, the two recensions do not constitute what are called multiforms in oral 
theory—a virtual impossibility, considering the epic’s eventual extent. Rather, as 
Sukthankar noted for the Ādiparvan of the SR version but true for the entire recension, 
“the excess is due to additions, large and small, distributed almost entirely throughout the 
[Ādi] parvan” (xxxv). Sukthankar also noted omissions, passages found in the NR texts 
but not in the SR tradition. Additions and omissions: surely we are by now in a literate 
world (how can an “omission” occur in a dynamic oral tradition?). In other words, we 
have a transcript laid out, read and episodes and elaborations added on (or dropped). 
It would seem thus that the SR text clearly rises as a make-over of the NR text, 
the Southern redactors creating a sentimental version of a naïve text, by adding passages 
where they felt necessary and dropping them elsewhere. A famous example shows how 
this process of addition probably worked in actual practice, providing evidence that 
complements Hiltebeitel’s (2006) finding,18 solely derived from structural considerations 
of the” dips” between the main frames that make up the epic, both revealing the 
subterranean dynamics of the formation of the *Pūrvaśikhā SR text. An insertion of 1612 
verses into the SR occurs between adhyāyas 34 and 35 of the CE of the Sabhāparvan, not 
found in the Śārada version, nor the NR as a whole, and thus relegated in the CE as an 
appendix (II: [Appendix 1, #121]: 386-422). Edgerton, (1944 [II]: xxx), the editor of 
the Sabhāparvan for the CE, notes that “it is the longest single insertion...occupy[ing] a 
15 
full hundred pages of [P.P.S] Sastri’s text...seven adhyāyas...a glorification of Kṛṣṇa put 
in the mouth of Bhīṣma[.] It is not found in N[orthern] MSS” (My parentheses). In the 
peroration, Bhīṣma justifies the fitness of Kṛṣṇa to be the Guest King to be honoured at 
Yudhiṣṭira’s Rājasūya, at the sabha of the Sabhāparvan. 
P.L.Vaidya (1969: [I] xlviii) shows that the entire discourse is fabricated from the 
Harivaṃśa, mainly from adhyāyas 38, 41, 42. One aspect of the Harivaṃśa that Vaidya 
emphasizes is its dual nature, first as an “organic” part of the great epic, justifying the 
attribution of “śata-sāhasrī Saṃhitā” (100,000-verse epic) to it, and second, as its khilā, a 
“supplement”. Yet we find material from the supplement forming sections of the main 
epic, in the SR, forcing us to conclude that the redactor of the SR must have had the 
entire epic before him, and that he knew the whole of the epic, the main body of 18 
parvans and its supplements, to find or remember a discourse from the supplement 
suitable to be inserted into an earlier section of the main body of the text, no matter that 
this introduces in the process awkward repetitions, what Edgerton (xxx) calls “internal 
duplications” as with Sahadeva’s threats.19 
My argument in the rest of the paper is predicated to this incontrovertible fact, 
that at an early, decidedly “primitive” moment in its textual history, the epic is already 
found to be present in the peninsular region, the logic of chronology demanding that this 
be very likely a *Śārada text, 75,000 verses long in its modern CE and nearly the same 
length at this time, providing the NR text-template for its SR makeover. I will attempt to 
account for its rise in terms first of its plausible redactors and then the paleography 
needed for the transcription of the Sanskrit of the epic in an area already widely literate at 
16 
this time with a script adopted to Tamil phonology, the Tamil Brāhmī syllabary, created 
by Jains ca. 250 BCE. * * * * * * * 
Section B. i: The Origins of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, their Śrauta Traditions, and Southward Migration 
We know that the style of wearing one’s hair was a matter of ritual importance to 
the Vedic Aryans, often signifying adherence to a specific orthodoxy-orthopraxy 
complex. The term kapardin/kapardī, itself thought to be non-Vedic,20 occurs in the 
Ṛgveda, with six attestations (s.v. Lubotsky [1997] I: 420) in its different forms and 
seems to have signified the braided or tufted hair on a male’s otherwise shaven head, and 
the Vasiṣṭhas are said at ṚV 7.33.1 to wear their kapardin on the right side of the scalp. 
The pūrvaśikhā mode may well signify one such way of wearing one’s kapardin (indeed, 
just as its counterpart in this study, the aparaśikhā, another). In its extant practice, it 
consists in massing up the hair on top of otherwise shaven head into a knotted heap 
(Illustration I). Its earliest attestation occurs, as Gerhard Ehlers notes, (Response to EJVS 
10.1),21 at TS 7,4,9,1 (ṣikhām anu pra vapante): "to shave (the hair) forward in order to 
have a pūrvaśikhā" (Ehlers’ translation). As Ehlers points out, in the Taittirīya context, 
the ritualists are performing the gavamāyana ritual, imitating the "session of the cows" 
and accordingly wear the pūrvaśikhā at the end of the year in order to look like them: 
“gavāṃ hi tarhy anurūpā bhavanti (JB 2, 374)”. In other words, by the time of the 
redaction of the Taittirīya śākhā of the Yajurveda, ca. 1000-900 BCE, we have a distinct 
group wearing their hair in the pūrvaśikhā mode. We will see that the Taittirīya 
17 
comparison of the pūrvaśkhā with a physiognomic feature of an animal will reappear in 
an almost identical trope, later, in the Sangam poetry. 
Their śrauta traditions are made up from the following Veda śākhās22: 
i. Ṛgveda: The Śākala Ṛgveda and its Āśvalāyana Śrauta Sūtra (AŚS) 
make up the lion share of their Ṛgveda affiliation. However, in addition, 
the Kauṣītaki tradition (allied to the Śāṅkhāyana Śrauta Sūtra [ŚŚS]) of 
the Ṛgveda occurs among the Pūrvaśkhās, once, it is thought, with the 
Bāṣkala śākhā as its Ṛgveda text.23 The Bāṣkala śākhā is no longer extant 
even among the Nambudiri Brahmans, the Pūrvaśikhā group with still a 
very robust Kauṣītaki tradition. The Śākala śākhā is the universal Ṛgveda 
śākhā among the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, as it is the case amongst all 
Brahmans now globally. All the same, the Kauṣītaki tradition seems to 
have been ritually the most active of all axes among the Pūrvaśikhās (see 
below, and note 11). 
ii. Yajurveda: Only the Taittirīya śākhā of the Kṛṣṇa Yajurveda School 
occurs among the Pūrvaśikhās, in three different sūtra traditions: 
a. the Baudhāyana (both Śrauta and Gṛhya); 
b. the Vādhūla (both Śrauta and Gṛhya); 
c. the Āgniveśya, almost identical with the Vādhūla tradition, but 
only in its Gṛhya form. 
iii. Sāmaveda: Only the Jaiminīya śākhā of the Sāmaveda occurs among 
the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans. 
18 
Of the above, the Kāuṣītaki Ṛgveda, the Vādhūla-Āgniveśya Yajurveda and the 
Jaiminīya Sāmaveda occur only among the Pūrvaśikhās, so as to constitute positive proof 
of identity in epigraphic records and fieldwork: that is, if a Brahman is recorded in the 
grāmadeya plates or encountered in fieldwork in peninsular India as belonging to one of 
these Veda śākhās, he can be identified as a Pūrvaśikhā Brahman. Likewise, we have 
two epigraphic terms with unique Pūrvaśikhā attestations, paviḻiya and ś/jāmbavya, first a 
phonological corruption of bahuvṛca, the Āśvalāyana tradition, and the second, 
designating a branch of the Kauṣītaki sūtra of the Ṛgveda.24 From Witzel (1989; 1995), 
we can localize these Veda śākhās and sūtras to a broad area in the Gangā-Yamunā doab, 
in the Pāñcāla country, extending to the east along the Gangā (the Vādhūla tradition of 
the Taittirīya Samhita) to the Kosala area (the Kauṣītaki-Baudhāyana alliance), with 
substantial south-south-west extensions in the Jaiminīya realm (Map I). I argue in on- 
going work that some sort of geographical contiguity of the different schools produced 
specific śrauta axes in situ listed below. 
A śrauta tradition, arguably the most authentic, has, as we know, survived among 
the Pūrvaśikhā group, among the Nambudiri Brahmans,25 with abundant epigraphic 
evidence of śrautism among the other branches of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans till the 11th 
century CE from epigraphy (see below). Again, as we know, a tri-Vedic axis is the core 
of a śrauta ritual, the coordinated orchestration of the ādhvaryam, hautram, and the 
audgātram praxises in the unfolding of the ritual. I list below the four theoretical tri- 
Vedic axes possible for the performance a Pūrvaśikhā Śrauta ritual: 
i. Kauṣītaki Ṛgveda-Baudhāyana Yajurveda-Jaiminīya Sāmaveda 
ii. Kauṣītaki Ṛgveda-Vādhūla Yajurveda-Jaiminīya Sāmaveda 
19 
iii. Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda-Baudhāyana Yajurveda-Jaminīya Sāmaveda 
iv. Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda-Vādhūla Yajurveda-Jaiminīya Sāmaveda 
Of the four, the śrauta axis i seems to have been historically the most active,26 
with iii and iv following, respectively. The axis ii does not seem to occur in practice,27 
the original geographic regions of these traditions not having been, perhaps, contiguous. 
I must add that the Kauṣītaki tradition adds to the 16-priest complement of the 
śrauta ritual personnel an additional ritualist (BŚS 2.7), the Sadasya priest, in as much as 
Vyāsa, the traditional redactor of the Mahābhārata epic appears as part of the sadasya 
assembled in the Janamejayas’s Snake Sacrifice when the epic is formally sung to the 
world, by the Śauti. It is not clear if Vyāsa is designated formally as the Sadasya priest or 
merely as a member of the learned group assembled at the sadas, the ritual hall.28 It is 
possible that the Kauṣītaki tradition merely formalizes an existing tradition surrounding 
the installation of a learned member of the śrauta community as Sadasya.29 
Finally, if the Śārada text is the simplicior text, it would follow that it is traceable 
to the Kuru-Pāñcāla area: by general consensus, the epic took shape in the northern Kuru 
area, around Kurukṣetra, not far from the regions to which the Pūrvaśikhā Veda śākhās 
have been localized, generally the Ganga-Yamuna doab. It is possible that they had the 
text with them, or even that, they were part of the agency of its final redaction. 
We have some direct evidence supporting the second conjecture, that the original 
Pūrvaśikhā group may have had links to the redaction of the epic in its extant frame- 
narrative form. We know that in the immediate post-Vedic period, when the form of 
frame narratives begins to arise as a function of the emerging narrative perfect in the 
Vedic, it reaches, as Witzel shows (1987c: 395; passim),30 its most sophisticated 20 
development, in the Jaiminīyabrāhmaṇa, part of the signature Pūrvaśikhā Sāmaveda 
tradition, in the retelling of the legend of Cyāvana a ṛṣi of the Bhṛgu lineage. And as we 
know, the form reaches its culmination in the extant Mahābhārata, framed at the 
innermost frame by Vyāsa’s discourse to Sumantu, Jaimini, Vaiśaṃpāyana, Śuka and 
Paila and at the outermost frame by the Śauti Ucchaśravas’s discourse to Śaunaka and the 
other ṛṣis in the sadas, with Vyāsa himself present possibly in the ritualistic role of the 
Sadasya priest, an office only evidenced in the Pūrvaśikhā śrauta praxis. A link to the 
Jaiminīyas is further seen in the development of closely related Bhṛhaddevata: Tokunaga 
(1997: 186) cites the Sāmaveda Brāhmaṇas, Jaiminīya and its lost proto-text, the 
Ṣāṭyāyana as “[of] special importance” in the development of the story of Dadhyañc (Bd. 
16d-23), adding, (186, note 2): “A close relationship of our author [that of Bd] with the 
Sāmaveda is also attested by his frequent mention of the teachers and sources presumably 
associated with this school” (My parenthesis]. Parpola (1984: 463-64) adduces a similar 
link between the epic and the Jaiminīya tradition, noting that Jaimini was the udgātha 
priest of Janamejaya’s sarpa sattra and one of the five figures to whom Vyāsa committed 
the epic.31 We should note that this picture dove-tails with the main features of the 
Hiltebeitel-Witzel model of the textualizatin of the epic mentioned earlier: the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans, still in the Vedic realm, would be part of Hiltebeitel’s “committee of 
Brahmans” who redact the epic into a Brahmanical work. Hiltebeitel (2001: 19) sees 
them as “out of sorts” Brahmans “who may have had some minor king’s or merchant’s 
patronage, but probably for personal reasons show a deep appreciation of, and indeed 
exalt, Brahmans who practice “the way of gleaning”: that is uñchavṛtti Brahmans reduced 
21 
to poverty who live a married life and feed their guests and family by “gleaning” grain,” 
not unlike, as Hiltebeitel (27) notes, Patañjali’s śiṣṭha Brahmans.32 It goes without saying 
that such Brahmans would also be śrautins, functioning as the agents of the Vedic oral 
traditions, as what comes to be called in Manu the Śrotriya Brahmans.33 We must note 
that a serious threat does rise in the east, as I argue below, to these Vedic traditions 
formed in the west, in the Kuru-Pñcāla area, in the form of the Vājanseyi-centered 
Vedism, promoted by the Magadha imperialism, possibly rendering these western 
Brahmans “out of sorts”. Thus the reformist Brahmanical dynasties, who would seek to 
support śrauta traditions, would naturally form suitable patrons (Witzel 2006). I argue 
below, in Section D, that what comes to be schematized in I. Mahadevan (2003) as the 
Southern Brāhmī script, a *Southern Brāhmī script, served the textualization of the epic 
and traveled southward later with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans with their departure, evolving 
later into its different attested scripts in the peninsula, the Grantha being the one most 
relevant to this study. 
We cannot determine the exact dates of departure of the Pūrvaśikhā group from 
the antarvedi area, nor the motives behind the departure, but we can go farther than the 
vague wanderlust of the Brahman often noted in literature impelling migration—Agastya 
of the Ṛgveda himself seen in some fanciful historiography as the redoubtable Vedic 
counterpart of Friar Tuck of Walter Scott’s Ivanhoe, leading Brahman migration 
southward.34 On the other hand, the śrauta axes that I have listed above and their survival 
in a live oral tradition to our times make it probable that it was an organized departure.35 
Its live survival today among one of the branches of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans in a 
continuous and unbroken practice testifies to the continual Vedic svādhyāya institutions 
22 
at work over time and space, suggesting a sizeable number of families moving in tandem, 
necessitating, as I argue in on-going work, a complete revision of our existing ideas about 
Brahman migrations. It is possible that the rise of the Śukla Yajurveda tradition as an 
imperial praxis under the Magadhan hegemony in the Kosala-Videha lands (5th-6th 
century BCE)36 may be a factor: it is useful to note here the well-attested and extreme 
dislike of the Māgadha Brahmans in Vedic texts as for instance the reference at 
Lāṭyāyana Śrauta Sūtra (8. 6. 28), “the despicable Brāhmaṇa-fellows native to Magadha” 
(Parpola 1968: 29; n.1).37 The rises of Buddhism and Jainism may also have played a 
role. 
There is little doubt that an external agency impelled the movement. We may rule 
out impulsive or eccentric migrants, although as with Bāvari of the Buddhist texts (see 
below) there were such cases. As I have indicated above, a live śrauta tradition has 
survived among the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans (as well as among the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, 
the second group in migration) showing that the start-up migrant population should have 
met, as I argue in greater detail elsewhere, two sustainability criteria: first biological and 
thus linked to the Gotra distributions of the start-up population; second, in terms of the 
Vedic praxis, thus linked to the Sūtra affiliations. That is, from the first criterion, we can 
deduce, and this is confirmed by both epigraphy and field work, that the start-up 
population had enough affiliates to the different Gotra labels to meet the twin criteria of a 
Brahmanical marriage: exogamy, ruling out a spouse of one’s own Gotra label; 
endogamy, allowing kinship only between Gotra affiliates. Both the Pūrvaśikhā and 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans meet this criterion. Both groups also meet the second 
sustainability criterion, that of the Sūtra distribution of the start-up population to maintain 
23 
live Vedic praxises, especially in its srauta form. As we know, this requires the 
coordination of three individual Vedic praxises, those of the hautram, ādhvaryam and 
audgātram: sufficient human agency in terms of numbers must be presumed to be present 
in the original migrant population to have enabled the sustainability of the Vedic oral 
traditions. Thus in both cases of the Brahmans, and we have ample epigraphic evidence 
for the Aparaśikhā group, the migrant population was large and varied enough along the 
two sustainability criteria, suggesting that the migration itself was possibly well- 
coordinated and planned. 
We may rule out in this context the commonplace economic motive of migration 
in the case of Śrauta Brahman communities. A self sustaining Śrauta Brahman 
community is generally seen to be affluent in its traditional setting, the affluence arising 
entirely from patronage—indeed, the śrauta culture demanding it and royal patronage 
providing it, the brahma-kṣatra alliance of the Vedic age functioning at the ground level. 
This does not necessarily conflict with the idealized poverty of the uñchavṛtti institution, 
noted above, the affluence essentially funding the expenses of the annual śrauta rituals.38 
It is tempting to place the departure of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans before the 
formation of the Āpastaṃba Śrauta Sūtra tradition, ca. 300 BCE, as it is signally absent 
among them. However, we can possibly mark their southward movement on the 
dakṣiṇāpatha from Buddhist records—in keeping with the general pattern, noted by 
Witzel,39 that many details of early Brahman history are often evidenced in Buddhist 
records. The Pāli Canon text, the Suttanipāta,40 records the performance of a śrauta ritual 
on the dakṣinṇāpatha, calling it a mahāyaññam (l. 979), at Assaka on the Godāvarī: 
Bāvari, a wanderlust-type Brahman, arrives at Assaka in the neighborhood of Aḷaka, from 
24 
Mithila, Kosala and after making himself welcome at the prosperous Brahman 
settlements and alms from them on the banks of the river for three years performs the 
mahāyajña with 16 priests (l. 1006: soḷasa brāhmaṇa) from among his hosts in the 
Assaka Brahman community—clearly a śrauta ritual, 16 priests being the complement of 
a śrauta ritual. We already know that Bāvari in his native Kosala is a product of the 
Vedic svādhyāya system, a master of mantras (l. 977 manta pāragū). A traditional 
brahmodya follows at the conclusion of the śrauta ritual and with it, the danger of 
possible explosions of heads. The 16 priests go north to the Buddha, traversing the 
dakṣiṇāpatha northward to learn, as per the Buddhalogical plotting of the account, the 
secret of keeping their heads from exploding and thus avoid, again, from the Buddhist 
point of view, the occupational hazard of the Śrauta Brahmans. 
The Suttanipāta text is part of the older layers of the Pāli Canon text, placed in the 
3rd century BCE.41 It is quite likely that this was a Pūrvaśikhā Śrauta ritual: the Assaka 
settlement would seem to be too far away from the śrauta traditions surrounding the 
Śukla Yajurveda, relatively recently formed, some three centuries or so ago, in the 
Kosala-Videha area. The newer Āpastaṃba-based ritualism of the second group of 
Brahmans of this study, ca. 300 BCE and centering around Mathurā on the Yamunā 
would be too recent also to have reached this far south and east by the time of the 
Suttanipāta text. And the total priestly complement, the 16 that went north and became, 
alas, Buddhists plus Bāvari, giving us 17 ritualists in all, resonates with the Kauṣītaki 
Śrautism. 
25 
B. ii. The Pūrvaśikhā Presence in the Sangam Tamil Country and the Creation of the 
*Pūrvaśikhā Text. 
Their arrival and presence in the Tamil country during the Sangam period is, on 
the other hand, beyond dispute. Hart (1975: 149) estimates that about 10% of the 
Sangam poets were Brahmans, deeming it a low estimate as “not all Brahmins could have 
had telltale names.” It is difficult to imagine what the global numbers of the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans were in the Sangam country for this period; there is little doubt as inferred 
from the two sustainability criteria above that it must have been substantial. The Vedic 
imprint on Sangam poetry is really quite vast, indicating a sizeable Brahman complement 
behind it. Moreover, Brahmans are equally attested in all three Sangam kingdoms, 
indicating an isotropic distribution along the three Sangam kingdoms. And the one Vedic 
item that reveals to us the Brahman presence in the Sangam period is the “experience- 
near” feature,42 the style of the wearing of the hair among the males of the group, namely 
the kuṭumi. The kuṭumi, the Sangam Tamil word for the hair tuft (from koṭi and koṭu 
[DEDR # 2049]43 first signifying “banner, flag, streamer” and the second, “summit of a 
hill, peak, a mountain”) is distinctly in the pūrvaśikhā mode, attested in poem after 
poem, amounting to a poetic trope44—or Ramanujan’s “poetic code” (1985: 282)--as in 
the two following examples: 
“And all those horses of our man of the tall hills 
have tufts of hair like the Brahman urchins of our town” 
(Aiṅkurunūṛu 202; A.K.Ramanujan’s [1985: 9] translation) 
“[T]he tuft on his head is like the mane of a horse” 
26 
(Puṛanānūṛu 310:11; George Hart’s [1999: 179] translation) 
The horse’s mane to which the kuṭumi is being compared above recalls the calf’s newly 
forming horns of the Taittirīya passage, noted earlier: the hair in both cases is massed up 
toward the front of the head. 
Because of its excellent DEDR derivation noted above as a “flag” or “streamer,” 
the kuṭumi as pūrvaśikhā may be taken to signify the indigenous mode of wearing hair in 
the Tamil country before the arrival of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans: if so, we have here a 
striking coincidence between the indigenous style and immigrant style, perhaps even 
accounting for the wide patronage and welcome the Brahmans are seen enjoying in the 
Tamil country in the Sangam period. Above, the pūrvaśikhā is specifically linked to a 
Brahman child in the Ainkuṛunūṛu verse, the language suggestive of total acculturation— 
an urchin running about the streets—of the Brahman group in the host region. The 
elegiac subject in the second example is a young warrior, fallen in battle, having “slain 
painted elephants” (l.5) and thus presumably not a Brahman, but presented in the same 
trope as the Brahman child, suggesting that the front tuft was universal in the Tamil 
country at this time and that the term as such signified only this mode in the Sangam 
period. It is also significant that a Tamil word comes to signify a Vedic item, suggesting 
an exuberant acculturation between the Sangam era Brahmans and the indigenous people 
of the Tamil country 
Could “kuṭumi” signify the aparaśikha mode as well?45 The aparaśikhā mode 
would signify a tuft of hair hanging down from the back of the head, like a pony tail. It 
would seem that either tōkai (DEDR 3532) or vāl (DEDR Appendix 17) is the more 
suitable word for comparison, to indicate an item hanging vertically down. The poet uses 
27 
instead, kuṭumi, signifying the mane, a horizontal item on a galloping horse, thus more 
appropriate for the pūrvaśikhā mode. Etymologically, “kuṭumi” seems to signify the fore 
part of the head, as with the crown of peacock (Subrahmanian 1966: 285). The poet uses, 
moreover, the horse to suggest abandon and virility—especially in the case of the fallen 
hero. Thus it would seem that the poet had in mind a horse in gallop, an apt image of 
heroism of the fallen hero and the urchin running about wildly, with the top knot 
streaming, like the horse’s mane, from the fore part of the head. Finally, the word is sex- 
specific: it is never used to refer to a woman’s braids, hanging from the back of the head, 
not generically different from the aparaśikhā mode. Thus, it would seem this that the 
kuṭumi of the Sangam poetry is the fore-lock kind, wound and tied up at the top of the 
head, streaming out like a flag or banner or the mane of a horse when loose. 
The much noted Vedic details of Sangam poetry (Sastri: [1935] 1975: 93; 
Parpola: 1983)46 also accord with what we know of the Pūrvaśikhā śrauta tradition: the 
most notable śrauta ritual described Sangam poetry is the Agnicayana, in Puṛanānūṛu 224 
(ll. 6-9), still extant among the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās in a live praxis. It is true that the 
Agnicayana ritual occurs among the second group, the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, as well. 
However, the Agnicayana of the Sangam poetry is either the pāñcapatrikā (“five-tipped”) 
or the ṣaṭpatrikā (“six-tipped”) type, in which the altar is shaped after a bird (kite, at l. 9 
above): the Agnicayana with the bird-shaped altar is the only type known among the 
Pūrvaśikhās, whereas it is only one of several types of altars known among the 
Aparaśikhās and nor is it the most popular one.47 Thus, in conjunction with the 
pūrvaśikhā kuṭumi attested in Sangam poetry, we can conclude that the Sangam-era 
Brahmans were Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans. 
28 
The one Sattra-type ritual referred to in Sangam poetry is the Rājasūya, 
performed by a Cōḷa king, Vēṭṭa Perunāṛkiḷḷi, styled by the poet Pāṇṭaran Kaṇṇanār as 
Cōḻan Irācacūyam Vēṭṭa Perunārkiḷḷi at Puṛanānūṛu 16. The Pūrvaśikhā Vedism was 
developed fully enough to meet the performance of the Rājasūya ritual. We may assert 
this not just on ritual grounds; a considerable discursive literature exists among 
Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās on the Rājasūya literature, the most significant of which is 
Narayana Bhaṭṭatiri’s Rājasūyaprabandha (ca. 17th century; Kunjunni Raja Agni II: 309), 
an allegorical interpretation of the Agnicayana, in which the bricks that go into the 
making of the altar are related to the story of Kṛṣṇa (Staal 1983 [I]: 187). We have 
already seen how a 1612-verse insertion into the Sabhāparvan from the Harivaṃśa 
celebrates Kṛṣṇa as the worthy guest at Yudhiṣṭira’s Rājasūya in the SR Mahābhārata. 
The interest in Rājasūya persists to the modern times, in the writings of the foremost 
Nambudiri ritualist of our times, Ērkkara Raman Nambudiri.48 It should be added that 
the responsibility of ritually crowning the Cōḷa monarch lay with the Pūrvaśikhā Dīkṣitars 
of Chidambaram in historical times.49 
Altogether, four Brahmanical gotras occur in Sangam literature (kaunḍiniya- 
vasiṣṭha, kauśika-viśvāmitra, ātreya, and gautama-aṇgirasa)50 and they also occur 
regularly among the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, although this could not be thought to have 
probative value, as the same gotras occur among the Aparaśikhās as well. It is very 
likely, as my on-going study shows,51 that the distribution of gotra labels is globally 
isotropic for the Brahman group as a whole, having formed in the period right after the 
redaction of the Ṛgveda and but before the formation of the Yajurveda and Sāmaveda 
traditions. This is seen from the fact that the gotras of the adherents of all the three 
29 
Vedas, the Vedas of the rituals, go back to the ca. 50 gotra-pravara lists of the 
Baudhāyana Śrauta Sūtra appendixes, and these 50 pravaras are linked in turn to the ṛṣi 
composers of the Ṛgveda as indexed in the Anukramaṇī lists. In other words, when the 
adherence to the Yajurveda or the Sāmaveda, as the case may be, arose as a family 
tradition based on birth and institutionalized subsequently by a svādhyāya system, the 
adhering family already possessed a gotra identity originally derived from a ṛṣi of the 
Ṛgvedic hymns. It is useful to note, on the other hand, that the gotra profile of the 
adherents of the Atharvaveda—a Veda with no function in the śrauta tradition--is entirely 
different.52 
A further link between the Sangam poetry and the Pūrvaśikhā group may be the 
polygamy referred to at Puṛanānūru 178, a full-dress description of an ideal Vedic 
Brahman of the lineage of the kauṇḍinya gotra. He is pictured with three wives. It is 
quite possible that polygamy existed among the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans; it was not 
uncommon among the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās even into the historical period,53 while it 
seems almost entirely unattested among the Aparaśikhā group. In the poem, the chief 
wife wears an ornamental head-piece called valai: however, I have not been able to trace 
it to either the Pūrvaśikhā or Aparaśikhhā Brahmans. 
Hart (1975: 33-34; 1999:22) based on the “war sacrifice” mentioned Puṛanānūṛu 
26 theorizes that the Sangam era Brahmans were “different” (1975:51) from their 
Northern counterparts, adding, however, a few lines later that they “retained much of 
their Northern outlook and way of life” (51). We do not know what exactly the “war 
sacrifice” entailed; the verse referring to the sacrifice reads (Hart 1999: 22): 30 
“As Brahmans of the Four Vedas, calm though the breadth of their knowledge, 
devoted to restraint, surrounded you and kings carried out your orders, you 
completed the sacrifice established by tradition.” (ll. 12-14) 
The Brahmans are shown to be present at the sacrifice, but it is not clear if they perform it 
or take part in it. It is also not clear if the ritual was Vedic, although it is referred to as 
kēḷvi, a term usually signifying Vedic ritual, the term itself thought to be a translation of 
the Sanskrit śruti (Hart 1999: 252). Could it be an indigenous ritual? As Harts notes, 
“the earliest Brahmans did the only thing that they could if they were to stay in Tamilnad: 
they associated themselves with the kings....Thus they had to participate in such 
unbrahminical activities as the war sacrifice and cutting the bodies of those who had died 
in bed” (1975: 55). In other words, there was acculturation between the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans and the indigenous people, the temple-based Bhakti movements being the most 
striking result of this, and as we will see, the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans are concretely linked 
to both temples and Bhakti movement. All the same, a śrauta core, still extant, remains 
intact with the group. 
One other piece of evidence, albeit negative, favouring the view that the Sangam 
era Brahmans were all Pūrvaśikhās comes from epigraphy (see below). The first 
Brahman with the signature Aparaśikhā sūtra affiliation to the Āpastaṃba tradition 
appears in a Pallava brahmadeya Copper Plate only in the 5th century CE, and even then 
still in Upper South India, with the Pallava influence still far from descending into the 
Tamil country proper. As we will see below, the Āpastaṃba affiliates eventually 
constitute the principal segment of the Aparaśikhā population, upward of 70%, and we 
begin to see this dominance only by the 8th CE, with the 108-Brahman complement of the 
31 
grāmadeya system. In other words, it is quite unlikely that they were present in the 
Tamil-Kerala country during the Sangam period and its immediate aftermath. 
Likewise, we can eliminate the Gurukkal Brahmans, indigenous to the Tamil 
country, but on different grounds. Their presence is attested in the Tamil country in 
epigraphy in the Tamil middle ages and may well date from the Sangam period and even 
earlier. In the modern period, they are chiefly temple priests, adhering to an Āgama 
praxis. However, their Vedic traditions are incomplete or improvised, thus ruling them 
out as the Brahmans of the Sangam poetry. They are an all-Baudhāyana group with just 
five gotra affiliations, confined to “Bharadvaja, Kaśyapa, Kauśikā, Gautama and Ātreya 
(or Agastya) (sic)” (Fuller 1984: 28), but the mastery of the Taittirīya Samhita through an 
oral tradition is not found amongst them. I argue elsewhere that they might be seen as 
acculturated into Brahmanism by Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans on the latter’s first arrival in the 
Tamil country. It is possible the Gurukkals were already temple priests in the Tamil 
country when the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans arrived there; it is their universal profession 
today (Fuller 1984). Several historical Pūrvaśikha groups of the Tamil country are also 
linked to temple priesthoods, the most famous being the Dīkṣitars of Chidambaram. 
However, we must note that when the two groups are priests together in temples in the 
Tamil country, as at Avaṭaiyār Koil in Tanjavur or Tiruvanakkavu in Tiruchirappaḷḷi, the 
Tamil Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhā priests follow strictly Vedic liturgies, whereas the Gurukkals 
follow the Āgama liturgies. 
Were there other groups of Brahmans with a Vedic tradition in the Sangam 
country that have escaped our notice here? We can answer this question broadly in the 
negative thanks to the gazetteer discourse of the late 19th century, the different volumes 
32 
of “Castes and Tribes” of India: the gazetteers charted out, as in the case of the Thurston- 
Iyer inventory, all the Brhaman groups there were attested in the peninsular India in the 
late 19th century CE--all, then and now, still extant.54 It is seen that every Brahman group 
of the Gazettes can be plausibly accounted for in my stratigraphic scheme, the Pūrvaśikhā 
group in the Sangam period with its later different historical branches listed in Thurston 
and the Aparaśikhā group, with its many branches, likewise, listed in Thurston, arriving 
from the beginnings of the Pallava period. 
A preponderance of evidence thus suggests that the Brahmans of the Sangam 
poetry were Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans. We have already seen in Section A above that we 
have a Mahābhārata epic, almost certainly in its *Śarada form, present in the Tamil 
country at a “primitive” moment of the epic’s evolution, in the very beginnings of the 
first millennium of the CE. In other words, we see that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans and the 
epic are present in the same area at the same time. Both Sanskrit epics are attested in 
Sangam poetry, with the Mahābhārata appearing in a Tamil translation, known in 
subsequent commentarial discourse as the Peruntēvanār-pāṭiya Pāratam—the Bhārata 
sung by Peruntēvanār. Five groups of verses said to be excerpted from this translation 
appear as invocations to gods--kaṭavul vāḻttu--in five collections of Sangam poetry, but 
they are clearly of later origins, with the verses themselves not linked to the 
Mahābhārata thematically or otherwise. However, these gods’ praises—two to Śiva; two 
to Viṣṇu, one to Murukan—are without the later sectarian tones, especially in the case of 
the first two sets and thus dating themselves earlier than the Bhakti poetry, starting ca. 7th 
century CE.55 
33 
The link between the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans and the epic is further substantiated 
by what may be seen as the post history of the *Pūrvaśikhā text of my chart, resulting in 
the eventual Malayalam version in the Malabar area of modern Kerala and what I have 
designated as the Σ-SR text, remaining in the Tamil country. 
First, the Malayalam version of the SR text: as noted above, the Poona editors 
found this text to be shortest, the Śārada text of the SR tradition. Being almost the 
archetype, it must be closest to, if not identical with, the *Pūrvaśikhā text of stemma 
chart (6-7 above) above. All the manuscripts of the Malayalam version, as we will see in 
Section B.vi below, came to Poona from the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhā homes and centers of 
learning in the Malabar region of Kerala. It is legitimate to assume thus that *Pūrvaśikhā 
text and the Malayalam version must be one and the same, taken in my scheme to the 
Malabar country by the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās at or after the Kaḷabhra Interregnum, ca. 
5th-7th centuries CE, when the different historical identities of individual Pūrvaśikhā 
groups begin to emerge. In other words, in the pre-Kaḷabhra period, the Pūrvaśikhā 
group was one large intact group, no doubt with internal segmentations, but linked 
through common Veda śākhās and the pūrvaśikhā tuft. We have enough evidence to link 
the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, historically attested today in Kerala—and so linked to that 
area as to appear autochthonous--to the Tamil country: We encounter, for instance, the 
uniquely Pūrvaśikhā epigraphic term, “paviḻiya” (or pakaḻiya) for the bahuvṛca- 
Āśvalāyana tradition, occurring in Taṇṭantoṭṭam Plates of the Pallavas, dated to 790 CE: 
four families (items 23 [kāśyapa gotra; Nimbēi Vaḍugaśarma-trivedi]; 97 [bhāradvāja 
gotra; Aṇappūr Bhavarudra-caturvedin; 128 [rathītara gotra; Mēṟṟamaṅgalam 
34 
Uttarakaraṇika alias Ayyan Parameśvaran; 134 [gārga gotra; Vaṅgippāru Damodara 
Bhaṭṭa]; Mahalingam 1988: 289-313; see below) adhering to this sūtra are part of the 
brahmadeya deed, living in the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam area of the Tamil country, in the southern 
parts of today’s Andhra Pradesh. Today, the term has survived only among the 
Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, designating the Āśvalāyana tradition, placing the Nambudiri 
Pūrvaśikhās thus in north-eastern part of the Tamil country as late as the 8th century CE 
(see below for a fuller discussion of the Pallava epigraphy and significance of the 
occurrence of the term paviḻiya this far north and northeast). We know as well that a 
Vedic ritualist like Hastiśarman—of Kāśyapa gotra and Jaiminīya Sūtra--of Vasiṣṭhakuṭi, 
thus with the historical identity of a Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhā and from the southern parts of the 
Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam area in the Tamil country, could arrive at Kerala and become a 
“Nambūdiri” Pūrvaśikhā there in roughly the same period: the impediment of the 
language and the alienation from long separation having not yet arisen.56 All of this 
would also explain the ‘anomalous’ alignment between the Śārada text and the 
Malayalam version, the latter being almost identical to the *Pūrvaśikhā text, rising 
directly from the template of the Śārada text, but leaving the Tamil country proper with 
the historical Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās at the Kaḷabhra Interregnum. As I elaborate 
elsewhere, it is possible the Pūrvaśikhā group which moves to Malabar to become the 
historical Nambudiri Brahmans, were already concentrated in the Karur region of the 
Cēra kingdom during the Sangam period, facing the Palghat gaps and arriving in the 
Malabar country through those gaps at the Kaḷabhra Interregnum, their settlements 
literally ballooning into Malabar from the Tamil country (Map II).57 
35 
It is even more significant that a *Pūrvaśikhā SR text remains in the Tamil 
country. This is my Σ-SR text, my choice of Greek letter hosting the ‘σ’ of Sukthankar’s 
σ-text, the two together giving rise to the Grantha-Telugu SR version in time. We must 
keep in mind that Sukthankar created the σ-text out of a theoretical need: he saw that all 
manuscripts from the peninsular region were familially Southern Recension texts, but the 
Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu texts showing greater exposure to the Northern Recension texts 
than the Malayalam versions. He hypothesized the σ-text, a Northern version, coming to 
the peninsular region, with, as we see now, the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. It is of interest as 
well that Sukthankar assumes a Southern Recension text to be resident in the Tamil 
country, although he does not designate it with a Greek letter, to host the σ-text, and 
transform it at the same time to the mould of the Southern Recension. In my chart above, 
this is the Σ-*Pūrvaśikhā text, remaining in the Tamil country with the rump Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans. 
It is possible to link, in fact, the Σ-SR text to one branch of the rump, the Śōḻiya 
Pūrvaśikhās, concentrated in the Cōḷa region thus acquiring the name. The evidence for 
this—more fully rehearsed below in Section B. v--comes from the role that the Śōḻiya 
Pūrvaśikhās are seen playing in the emergence of Śrīvaiṣnavism in the post Kaḷabhra 
period, ca. 7th CE. All four Brahman Āḻvārs are Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans by 
tradition, functioning thus, as we will see below, as a conduit for the Kṛṣnaism of the 
emerging Śrīvaiṣṇavism from the Mahābhārata. We know that the epic, especially the 
Harivaṃśa, is the sole source for the Kṛṣṇa material in the Āḻvār songs, not the Purāṇas, 
the earliest of the latter emerging in North India, ca. 200 CE when the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans are already in the Sangam Tamil country (see below). We noted above the 
36 
long Kṛṣṇaistic insertion from the Harivaṃśa into the Sabhāparvan, already done in the 
Sangam period, certainly before the Kaḷabhra Interregnum. It is quite likely that 
Kṛṣṇaism is incipient in the Tamil country even during the Sangam period: Ramanujan 
counts some 34 names among the Sangam poets with “kannan” in their names, the 
endearing diminutive for the god in Tamil.58 
B. iii. The Kaḷabhra Interregnum and the Dispersal of the Pūrvaśikhā Group 
Although the precise details of this famous interlude in Tamil history are still 
shrouded in mystery, there is wide consensus of historical opinion that, first, it occurred; 
second, it was caused by the invasion of the Tamil country by the Kaḷabhras from the 
Karnataka in the west and northwest, and third, the invasion had a religious component to 
it in that the Kaḷabhras were Jains. No doubt, the Kaḷabhra’a anti-Brahmanism, as 
evidenced in the Vēḷvikkuṭi Plates, received exaggerated play in the early historiography 
of the subject, the famous “long night” interlude of Tamil history according to K.A.N. 
Sastri (1964:19),59 but as the plates, certainly the central document of the Kaḷabhra 
Interregnum, show, the dispossession of Brahmans did take place and some sort of 
restoration under the Pāṇṭiyan rule was in place by early 7th century CE, ca. 620 CE, in 
Kaṭuṇkōṇ’s reign.60 It is useful to remember that the anti-Jainism of the Bhakti poetry, 
especially that of Appar and, with greater virulence, in that of Tirujñānasaṃbandar post- 
dates the Kaḷabhra Interregnum,61 perhaps, as I argue in Section C below, is even caused 
by it. Neither the Tamil Brāhmī cave inscriptions nor their literary counterpart, the 
Sangam poetry, even with, as noted above, a significant Vedic and Brahmanical content, 
is hostile to the Jains or their religion: in fact, as we will see below, in Section C, the 
37 
Tamil Brāhmī inscriptions show that the Jain religion played a role of paramount 
importance in the Tamil-Kerala country from 3rd century BCE to 6th century CE. 
In other words, there was an interregnum in Tamil history about this time, from 
5th to 7th centuries CE, with a before-and-after scenario: Sangam poetry with its heroic 
ethos before and the Bhakti poetry with its devotional ethos after. No doubt, there were 
many cross-over features from Sangam poetry to the Bhakti poetry, for example, in 
addition to those already noted above, the itinerary poet in both Sangam and Bhakti 
periods; a gradually sectarian god replacing the king of the Sangam poetry, among 
others.62 It is in this changed landscape that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans’ extant historical 
identities seem to begin to shape. One broad division is that of language, dividing the 
group into two historical divisions, Tamil-speaking and Malayalam-speaking, but only 
from ca. 9th century CE, reaching its final shape by the 11th century CE. As noted, 
intercourse existed between the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās and the Tamil Pūrvaśikhās well 
into 8th century CE, but by the middle ages of Tamil history, the different segments had 
begun to acquire their historical characteristics, defining broadly four extant groups: the 
Malayalam-speaking Nambudiri Brahmans; the Tamil-speaking Śōḻiya Brahmans (with 
many sub-divisions); the Dīkṣitar Brahmans of the Chidambaram Śiva temple; and the 
Mukkāṇi Brahmans of the Tiruchendur Murukan temple. 
In my scheme, the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās move to Kerala, to its Malabar region, 
through the Palghat gaps, their arrival creating a śrauta realm along both sides of the 
Bhāratap-puḻa river (Map II).63 The Tamil Pūrvaśikhās, still, it would seem, in the 
Kaḷabhra realm, fragment through most of the Kaveri area of the Cōḷa realm and the south 
east in the Pānṭiyan kingdom, each group carrying with it a common sthalapurāṇa of 
38 
their new homes, the most well-known of which is to be found among the Pūrvaśikhā 
Dīkṣitars of the Chidambaram temple: a given number of families, 3000 in the case of the 
Dīkṣitars of Chidambaram (3700 among the Śōḻiya-Śrīvaiṣṇava Brahmans of Tiruveḷḷarai; 
2000 among the Mukkāṇi Brahmans of Tiruchendur, 300 among both the Śōḻiya- 
Śrīvaiṣṇava Brahmans of Tintiruepparai on the Tāṃṛavaṛṇī and Śōḻiya Śaiva Brahmans of 
Avaṭaiyar Koil on the coast in the north in the Tanjavur District) arrive at their new 
homes and find one family missing; the deity of the temple in the new home—Śiva in 
Chidambaram or in Avaṭaiyār Koil, Viṣnu-Perumāḷ in Tiruveḷḷarai on the Kaveri or 
Tintirurupperai on the Tāmravarṇī, or Murukan-Subrahmaniam at Tiruchendur--taking 
his place. It is seen that this particular narrative occurs only among the Tamil Pūrvaśikhā 
groups, suggesting a common origin. It should be further noted that all three principal 
gods of the Tamil country appear in the trope.64 
B. iv. The Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās and *Pūrvaśikhā Text in Emerging Kerala 
A central point of my argument is that a *Pūrvaśikhā text leaves the Tamil 
country with the Pūrvaśikha Brahmans, the later historical Nambudiri Brahmans, by now 
almost certainly in the palm leaf manuscripts and, most likely, already in Grantha script 
or an early related Southern Brāhmī script, an important point to which I will come back 
in Section D below. When this manuscript arrived in Poona for collation purposes 
toward the preparation of the CE, it was found to be the shortest SR text, besides being 
the “best,” a universal editorial comment,65 pointing to the high order of its native 
scholarly ecology in terms of the manuscripts and transmission over time. They were in 
palm leaf manuscripts, many bearing the colophon datings of the 19th century and the 
39 
script in which it was transcribed was the Ārya-eḻuttu, a script that Mahadevan see as 
originating from adaptation between the Grantha script and the Vaṭṭeḻuttu scripts (see 
below for a full discussion of this.) The earliest manuscript dates from the fist half of the 
18th century, and as far as can be ascertained, the longevity of the palm leaf manuscript in 
the tropical weather of Kerala is somewhere between 200 to 300 years, giving us three 
cycles of re-copying from their probable date of coming to Kerala. 
We do not know if the text developed during this phase.66 The traditional 
Nambudiri lore lays great stress on the śrauta tradition: dating from about precisely this 
period, how ca. 400 CE, it received a new orientation from Mēḻattōḷ of 99 Agniṣṭomas, a 
figure of the first importance in this tradition-bound community, only Indra’s intervention 
deterring him from the 100th—in a sort of variation of the play of numbers in general of 
the Pūrvaśikhā sthalapurāṇas, noted above.67 The entire extant Nambudiri śrauta 
tradition derives from this figure such that the eight families or gṛhaṃs which took part 
with Mēḻattōḷ in the original marathon series of Somayāgas form the traditional elite of 
the community, the well-known āḍhyān group of eight families, and the root sites of 
these families cluster on the Bhāratap-Puḻa banks on both banks, west of the Palghat gaps, 
comprising the current districts of Malappuram to the north of the river, Palghat directly 
to its west and Trichur south-southwest (Map III).68 The six temples to which all families 
with the traditional śrauta rights also cluster in the same area.69 
The epic seems to have had a different history, a line of development we will see 
in the Tamil country as well: it becomes widely disseminated into the Kerala society at 
large, supplying first a fundamental set of scenes of the kūṭiyāṭṭaṃ and later the kathakaḷi 
dance repertoire, passing thus from the hands of the Brahmans per se, as the performing 40 
and singing personnel of the dance drama were traditionally non-Brahmans. It is likely 
that the manuscripts themselves of the different parvans lay dormant during the process, 
the epic leaching out to a wider public in songs—in striking contrast with the strictly 
regulated śrauta tradition, with only families with the traditional right, deriving from the 
99 Mēḻattōḷ agniṣṭomas, to perform the śrauta ritual undertaking it, even today. Thus it is 
that that the first re-telling of the Mahābhārata in Malayalam comes from Tuñjettu 
Eḻuttacthan, a member of the Nair community, ca. 16th century CE, in the kiḷippāṭṭu mode, 
one tenth in extent of the entire epic. It is of equal interest that a complete verse-to-verse 
translation of the epic appears also in non-Brahman circles, not Nair but princely families 
with links to the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās through the saṃbandham alliance system, in 
Kuññukkuṭṭi Tampuran’s 125,000-verse (inclusive of the Harivaṃśa) translation of the 
epic, reliably recorded to have been accomplished in an astonishing 874 days, (1904- 
1907), with the Harivaṃśam taking another 3 1⁄2 months.70 
B. v. The Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās, the *Pūrvaśikhā text, and the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism 
It is of the utmost importance to note that a *Pūrvaśikhā text remains behind in 
the Tamil country, my Σ-text, in the hands of the future Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās. It stands to 
reason that it would; it is unlikely that all traces of the epic would have left for the 
Malabar country with the future Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās at the Kaḷabhra Interregnum. It 
is also the concrete evidence that the *Pūrvaśikhā version had risen in the Sangam 
country before the Kaḷabhra Interregnum as a text of the entire Pūrvaśikhā group: we see 
the texts in the hands of its two branches, otherwise already linked by the pūrvaśikhā tuft 
and rare Vedic śākhās. And the Σ-SR text produces even more far-reaching aftermaths 
41 
than the *Pūrvaśikhā that moved to the Malabar country with the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās: 
it functions as the nursery of the Śrīvaiṣṇava-Bhakti movement in the peninsular region. 
It also hosts the Sukthankar σ-text, a theoretical entity conceived by him to fit the 
patterns of textual histories and developments revealed by the manuscripts. 
First, the Σ-text provides the basis for the Viṣṇu-Nārāyaṇa-Kṛṣṇa content of the 
Āḻvār-Vaiṣṇavism, especially its khilā parvan, the Harivaṃśa. As we have already noted, 
the Harivamśa of the Mahabhārata was the principal conduit of the Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa content 
to the merging Āḻvār-discourse of the Śrīvaiṣnavism: All the four Brahman Āḻvārs (three 
male and the fourth the foundling daughter of one of them) were Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās, 
presumably thus with Σ-text of the SR. It is their songs, and those of other seven non- 
Brahman Āḻvārs, that are collected as the Nālāyiradivyaprabhandam (The Four Thousand 
Sacred Utterances; NDP), establishing the Kṛṣṇa-Viṣṇu of the Mahābhārata (and Rāma 
of the sister epic Rāmāyaṇa) as the central figure in the emerging Śrīvaiṣṇava Bhakti 
movement, in the post-Kaḷabhra period, 6th-9th centuries CE. We must note here, and I 
will come back to it, that the source for the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism is solely and entirely the 
epic (Hardy 1983), the Vaiṣṇava literature of the north (2nd century CE), the Viṣṇu and 
Brahmapurāṇas in particular, playing no part in its formation.71 As in Kerala above, in 
Section A. iii, the epic seems to spread beyond the Brahmans in the Tamil country as 
well, in that the other seven Āḻvārs are from non-Brahman social groups, Nammāḻvār- 
Śaṭagōpan in particular, eventually to become the most iconic of all Āḻvārs. Also, as in 
Kerala, the epic comes to structure the important non-Brahman repertory of the kūtthu 
rituals of the non-Brahman social groups of the Tamil country. I will come back to both 
these problems below. 
42 
And second, the Σ-text functions as the host Mahābhārata to the in-coming 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans and their σ text. As noted earlier, we do not know if this group, 
beginning to be attested in significant numbers in the Tamil country proper well after the 
Kaḷabhra Interregnum, brought with them the epic, although the conclusion, based on 
their distinguished Vedic credentials (see below), that that they did so is irresistible. And 
if they did, considering that their original homes lay in the Mathurā region on the 
Yamunā in a time period starting with 5th to several centuries afterwards, it was a 
Northern Recension text, possibly part of the Vulgate (K) group, as is indeed shown by 
the Sukthankar phantom σ-text. Yet the Tamil and Telugu versions of the Mahābhārata 
that went to Poona, mostly from Tanjore’s Sarasvatī Mahāl library, subsequently, an 
Aparaśikhā center of learning, (first created in the 1600’s CE under Tanjore Nayakas as 
Sarasvatī Bhaṇḍār, re-established in 1820 in its present name by King Serfoji II of the 
Mahratta rule of Tanjavur; see below), are all in the mould of the SR. 
It was in order to solve this difficulty that Sukthankar created the σ-text. He is 
not linking it to Brahman migrations; he sees that the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu 
manuscripts of the epic are all in the mould of the Southern Recension, vastly inflated in 
comparison to the Malayalam version of the epic, but familially also of the SR. 
Moreover, he finds this extra epic material to align itself regularly with the Northern 
Recension: so a NR must be present in the scene, the basis for his σ-text—the text we see 
coming in the scheme I am suggesting, with the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. As I noted above, 
that Sukthankar’s hypothetical σ-text finds a logical niche in the scheme proposed here of 
the migration of epics and Brahmans may well be the most probative link in its 
43 
reasoning--Sukthankar’s hypothesis validated by concrete evidence from the Brahman 
migration of my scheme. 
What is of interest, on the other hand, is that the SR text of the Śōḻiya 
Pūrvaśikhās, our Σ-text, holds the stage in facing the σ-text of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. 
The Aparaśikhā Brahmans, arriving in the Tamil country at the Pallava-Cōḷa patronage 
for more than half a millennium, become in time the dominant Brahman group of the 
Tamil country, outnumbering the Tamil Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans almost 25 to 1 by modern 
times and transforming them in the process into a minority in their own homes, and at 
that a thoroughly “interpellated” group.72 Yet the resident Southern Recension text, the 
Σ-text of the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās, holds the stage for the day. I will note that this is in 
keeping with another major product of interaction between the two Brahman groups, the 
complex tradition of the mature, historical Śrīvaiṣṇavism. 
We know from their Veda śākhās (see below) that the Aparaśikhā Brahmans 
originate in the Mathurā region on the Yamuna River, already a major area of the Kṛṣṇa 
cult at their departure ca. 5th century CE and later. There can be little doubt that the early 
Vaiṣṇava literature (Viṣnu- and Padma-Purāṇas) was known to them, if they were not its 
creators in the first place. Yet we see that they re-orient their native Vaiṣṇavism to the 
Āḻvār texts, the resident host Vaiṣṇava tradition of the Tamil country, eventually 
producing with Nāthamuni and later with Rāmānuja, the orthodoxy and orthopraxy of the 
historical Śrīvaiṣnavism. As Dihejia (1990) shows, the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, ca. 9th 
century CE, clearly showing the influence of Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism, is the outward 
manifestation of this synthesis, in some ways a counterpart in the Bhakti world to the 
44 
Tamil (Grantha) and Telugu versions of the Mahābhārata in the epic world. I will come 
back to this problem in detail below. 
It must be added here as a general point that the precise knowledge of the origin 
and development of Śrīvaiṣṇavism in South India is far from adequate and still clouded 
by zealous hagiography and sectarian ethos. We find that as late as S. Krishnaswamy 
Aiyangar’s Early Vaiṣṇavism (1914), Rāmānuja is thought to have preceded the Āḻvārs in 
the traditional Aparaśikhā historiography. Aiyangar is establishing what we know to be 
the broad historical sequence that characterizes the development of Śrīvaiṣṇavism in the 
Tamil country: first the Āḻvārs, fixed at a number, twelve in Rangachari ([1931]1986: 9), 
then the open-ended sequence of Ācāryas beginning with Nāthamuni, as we will see, an 
Aparaśikhā Brahman. We must note that the founding Āḻvār stratum of Śrīvaiṣṇavism 
entirely pre-dated the Aparaśikhā Brahman arrival, and it comprised several non- 
Brahman figures, not found to be the case with the Ācārya phase, which is an all- 
Brahman list. This is the reason why the entire Brahman content of Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism is 
found to be made up of the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās; the Aparaśikhā numbers swell through 
the 108-grāmadeya system only by the latter half of the Pallava reign, indeed supplying 
Nāthamuni the first figure in the Ācārya sequence and an Aparaśikhā Brahman, who 
creates the NDP from the Āḻvār compositions with the assistance of Maturakavi, a Śōḻiya 
Pūrvaśikhā. An interesting incident in the life of this figure gives us a picture of the 
social dynamics between the resident Pūrvaśikhās and the immigrant Aparaśikhās, 
resulting in what I have characterized above as the interpellated status (see note 50 
above) of the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās. Nāthamuni, already seen to be associated with the 
Pūrvaśikhā Maturakavi, sends his disciple Uyyakkondar, also a Pūrvaśikhā Brahman and 
45 
second to Nāthamuni in the later Ācārya sequence, as his wife’s escort to one of the area 
Pallava era land-grant Aparaśikhā settlements, where he is fed stale food outside the host- 
Aparaśikhā home because of his pūrvaśikhā, the outwardly, visible and experience-near 
marker (an incident strikingly recalling the more famous later one, in Ramanuja’s life, 
[see below] involving a similar conduct by his wife toward Ramanuja’s guru, Periya 
Nambi). The principals in both incidents, Nāthamuni and Rāmānuja, behave with noble 
revulsion toward the interpellation, Rāmānuja renouncing family life and wife and 
Nāthamuni extolling his disciple with the name Uyyakkondar [“you elevated me”], the 
name by which he is known in subsequent tradition.73 Indeed, so much so, it is hardly 
known in the Śrīvaiṣṇava community, as I found in my fieldwork, that all four Brahman 
Āḻvārs were Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans,74 even though as noted already and as we will see in 
detail in Section C, this scenario is verified by the epigraphy of the Aparaśikhā Brahman 
migration and the textual history of the SR Mahābhārata beyond all uncertainty. 
All of this throws, it must be added, interesting light on the acculturated state of 
the relationship between the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans and the indigenous non-Brahman 
groups: together they create (as is the case with the Nāyanmār-Śaivism as well) the Āḻvār 
Vaiṣṇavism. And we may ask what were the sources for the Kṛṣṇa myths—the three 
Viṣṇu steps, the various avatāras, that of dwarf Vāmana especially; the Govardhana 
mountain and above all, what Ramanujan (1981: 150-152) calls the “mutual cannibalism” 
of Kṛṣṇa and his devotee--in the poetry of Nammāḻvār, a non-Brahman Āḻvār and 
eventually the most iconic of all Āḻvārs? It will be recalled that Friedhelm Hardy (1983: 
413 and see note 49 above) poses this question with respect to the Brahman Āḻvār, 
Periyāḻvār (Viṣṇucitta), answering that the source could only have been the Mahābhārata, 
46 
Harivaṃśa in particular (the Σ-SR text in my scheme) and not the early Purāṇas—a 
conclusion broadly applicable to Nammāḻvār as well as other non-Brahman Āḻvārs. Hardy 
takes Periyāḻvār’s Sanskrit learning for granted: can we do so for the non-Brahman Āḻvārs 
as well? Perhaps not, but it is clear that the epic is no longer confined to its Sanskrit 
traditions. As we know, a Tamil translation already existed in the Sangam period, and as 
in Kerala, the material from epic begins to enter broadly into the social life of non- 
Brahman groups, in the kūthu repertory. As additional evidence of this, Hiltebeitel 
(1988; 1991a) has shown that the Draupadī cult is deeply entrenched through the length 
and breadth of the Tamil country. 
B. vi. The *Pūrvaśikhā text and the Poona Critical Edition 
Altogether 11 centers sent *Pūrvasikhā Mahābhārata to the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute at Poona from inside Kerala, 5 of them private Nambudiri homes 
(mana), others chiefly princely families and palace libraries, all, however, with close 
connections to the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās through the saṃbandam alliance system.75 
The colophon dates appear only occasionally, generally in the 19th century. No single 
center sent an entire corpus, Cochin State Library sending a maximum of 15 (Ādi, Sabhā, 
Virāta, Udyoga, Drona, Śalya, Sauptika, Strī, Anuśāsana, Śānti [minus the 
Mokṣadharma], Aśvamedhika, Mausala, Mahāprasthānika, Svargārohaṇa) and four 
sending only one parvan. However, all 24 parvans of the *Purvaśikhā text existed in 
Kerala. Moreover, if a particular house or center did not send a parvan to Poona, it did 
not mean that the parvan did not exist in that house or center. Thus for example in 2005 
47 
when I visited the Poomulli Mana, which sent the largest number of parvans (12) from 
among the Nambudiri homes to Poona, I saw the Bhīṣmaparvan in the mana’s very 
dilapidated library in regrettable contrast to its traditional repute for care and up-keeping 
of records. But it was not one of the 12 parvans that went to Poona from this center. 
The literary or scholarly ecology which kept these manuscripts in transmission 
shows itself to have been highly viable. We have the best data available for the 
Ādiparvan: 26 Malayalam manuscripts of the parvan went to Poona for the collation of 
the CE, of which 8 made the critical apparatus.76 All the above manuscripts that went to 
Poona were in palm leaf, written in Malayalam script, in the Āryeḻuttu script that the 
Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās developed in the Malabar province of the present-day Kerala 
state between the Grantha and Vaṭṭeḻuttu during the 13th century CE (I. Mahadevan 2003: 
212). We will see in Section C below that what may be thought of as the ‘scripta franca’ 
of the entire region of the Kerala—along with the eastern coast of the Tamil country, the 
Pāṇṭiyan kingdom—was at this time the Vaṭṭeḻuttu form of the Tamil Brāhmī script, a 
script that cannot meet the entire range of Sanskrit phonology, thus ruling itself out, I will 
note, as the script in which the SR was created in the same linguistic area. We will 
further see, from I. Mahadevan (2003) on the scripts of South India, that the only script 
that offers itself for the composition of the Sangam era SR *Pūrvaśikhā text was the 
Grantha script, or an earlier form of it, derived from the Southern Brāhmī script. 
Mahadevan notes without explanation that the Nambudiris developed the Āryeḻuttu script 
from the Grantha and the Vaṭṭeḻuttu scripts, around 13th century CE. In fact, in the 
linguistic map of Kerala, the traditional Āryeḻuttu region forms something of a wake in 
the Palghat area, largely overlapping the area of the Nambudiri settlements on the 
48 
Bhāratap-puḻa, the Vaṭṭeḻuttu script spreading to the south from the Bhāratap-puḻā and 
Kōleḻuttu, a form of Vaṭṭeḻuttu, to the north (Map IV). It is further seen that the area of 
the Āryeḻuttu script and Śrauta praxis of the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās coincide, suggesting 
that this script is the product of interaction in situ between the Grantha script that traveled 
with them to the Malabar region and the local Vaṭṭeḻuttu. 
Our best estimate for the longevity of the palm leaf manuscript is 300 years, plus 
or minus 100 years: thus, the *Pūrvaśikhā text must have gone through two cycles of 
copying after its creation. We know that there developed in Malabar a social caste of 
scribes, used by Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās to write down non-Vedic texts, the Sanskrit epics 
falling in this category.77 * * * * * * * 
Section C. i. The Origins of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, Their Śrauta Traditions and Their Arrival in the Tamil Country 
The outwardly distinguishing feature of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, corresponding 
to the pūrvaśikhā of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, is their aparaśikhā, “pin kuṭumi,” or back 
tuft in Tamil, as opposed to the “mun kuṭumi” or front tuft of the Pūrvaśikhās (Illustration 
2; the illustration is a painting in the Panjab Hills school of the 16th century, precisely the 
area to which we will trace the Aparaśikhā group below.) Indeed, the aparaśikhā style is 
the ubiquitous mode now, in all of India, so much so that kuṭumi neutrally signifies the 
aparaśikhā mode, although in Sangam period, it did the pūrvaśikhā. As we saw, the 
‘poetic code’ surrounding the representation of the kuṭumi in the Sangam poems clearly 
excludes the aparaśikhā mode. 
49 
Unlike the case with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, everything about the Aparaśikhā 
Brahmans is grounded in recorded history: their arrival in the Tamil country is one of the 
most meticulously recorded movements of human groups in history, especially 
considering its time span, ca. from 4th to 14th centuries CE. Like the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans, they too brought with them live, if semi-literate, śrauta traditions to peninsular 
India. Their Veda śākhās fall into the following groups:78 
i. Ṛgveda: Only the Śākhala śākhā of the Ṛgveda and its Āśvalāyana 
tradition are known among the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. The Kauṣītaki 
tradition of the Ṛgveda, the mainstay of the Pūrvaśikhā śruatism, is 
entirely unknown among them. 
ii Yajurveda: Both the Kṛṣṇa and the Śukla Yajurveda śākhās, the latter 
both its Kāṇviya and Mādhyandina recensions, are attested among the 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans, although a śrauta tradition has not survived along 
the Śukla Yajurveda matrix. The Kṛṣṇa Yajurveda is entirely of the 
Taittirīya śākhā, attested in four schools, a minority Baudhāyana school 
and the prepossessingly dominant Āpastaṃba school and its two sister 
traditions, the Bhāradvāja and Hiraṇyakeśi (aka Śāṭyāṣāḍha) schools. 
iii. Sāmaveda: Only the Kauthuma śākhā of the Sāmaveda is attested 
among the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, in its Drāhyāyana school. 
Of the above, the Śukla Yajurveda occurs only among the Aparaśikhā Brahmans in the 
Tamil country.79 Likewise, the Āpastaṃba (along with the nearly identical Bhāradvāja 
and Hiraṇyakeśi) and the Drāhyāyana traditions also occur only among the Aparaśikhā 50 
Brahmans: these signify thus positive control with respect to the Aparaśikhā Brahmans in 
epigraphy and fieldwork, just as the Kauṣītaki Ṛgveda, Vādhūla/Āgniveśya Yajurveda 
and Jaiminīya Sāmaveda do for the Pūrvaśikhās. And as with the Pūrvaśikhā term 
“paviḻiya” for the bahuvṛca tradition and ś/jāṃbavya for a branch of the Kauṣītaki 
tradition, the term “pravacana” for the Baudhāyana tradition seems to be an exclusive 
Aparaśikhā usage, in epigraphy (see below). 
As a Śukla Yajurveda Śrauta tradition is not extant among the Aparaśikhā 
Brahmans, the following four Śrauta matrices are possible among them: 
i. Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda-Baudhāyana Yajurveda-Drāhyāyana 
Sāmaveda 
ii. Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda-Āpastaṃba Yajurveda-Drāhyāyana Sāmaveda 
iii. Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda-Hiraṇyakeśi Yajurveda-Drāhyāyana Sāmaveda 
iv. Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda-Bhāradvāja Yajurveda-Drāhyāyana Sāmaveda 
The second axis seems to be the near universal tradition extant among the 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans, mostly in the agrahārams along the Kaveri river from 
Tiruchirapalli to Tanjavur and onward to Kumbakonam.80 Key epigraphic records, as we 
will see below, show that at least 70% of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans belong to the 
Āpastaṃba tradition, the Yajurvedis as a whole forming possibly upto 90 per cent, and 
they are the subjects of the Pallava-Cōḷa land grants in the villages along the Kaveri river. 
This striking statistic helps us trace the Aparaśikhā group to the Mathurā regions 
of the Yamunā River, to which the Āpastaṃba tradition has been localized.81 The region 
would extend to the Hariyana area in the northwest (Map V) to the old Kuru area in the 
51 
north with its Kauthuma Sāmaveda, the Malva territory in the south and southeast. A 
name that appears frequently in the Aparaśikhā epigraphic records is Daśapuriyan, after 
the Malva city Daśapuri (also known as Mandasor). The Aparaśikhā emigration seems to 
coincide in the main with the fall of the entire region first to the Huns (5th-6th centuries 
CE) and the Muslims later, with widespread dispersion of the Brahmans of the area, 
including the Daśapuri Brahmans. 
Like the Pūrvaśikhā group, the Aparaśikhās also fall into several internal 
divisions, not endogamous with one another till recent times and even today not fully so. 
We know that this division goes back to the time—and place—of migration. Its first 
attestation comes to us from the famous family history of Rāmānuja. His family was of 
the “vaṭama” division, his preceptor’s that of “bṛhatcaraṇam” (as it happens, the two 
principal and largest groups of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans) forcing, as we noted above, 
Rāmānuja’s wife into a conduct unbecoming toward his guru and embarrassing 
personally to him.82 That is, these divisions existed among the Aparaśikhā Brahmans 
before their arrival in the Tamil country and they arrived as strangers, despite adherence 
to common Veda śākhās. We will see that the Vaiṣṇava group, when it begins to emerge 
as a separate group within Ramanuja’s life time, is made up almost entirely from the 
Aparaśikhā group, all of the vaṭakalai group and 85% of the tenkalai, the balance of 15% 
made up of the Pūrvaśikhā group, the Brahman element of the founders of Āḻvār- 
Vaiṣṇavism. 
I list here from Thurston (1909) the names of these divisions, from the most 
numerous to the least as determined in my field work:83 i. the vaṭama; ii. the 
bṛhatcaraṇam; iii. the aṣṭasahasram; iv. the vāttima; v. the prathamasākī. The first four 
52 
are all Taittirīya adherents, mostly its Āpastaṃba Sūtra; the last is made up entirely of 
adherents of the Śukla Yajurveda in both its recensions, the Kāṇva and the Mādhyandina. 
C. ii. The Pallava Period Epigraphy and the Aparaśikhā Brahmans 
As I noted above, the first Aparaśikhā Brahman we can positively identify as one 
may well be Jyeṣṭa Śarman of the Gautama gotra and group-specific Āpastaṃba Sūtra of 
the Vēsantha (Jalapuram) Copper Plates of the Pallava King Simhavarman II, issued in 
his 19th Regnal Year, in the 5th century CE, granting the village of Vēsantha to Jyeṣṭa 
Śarman (Mahalingam 1983: 52-54; Item 7).84 The royal order is issued from 
Kanchipuram (not perhaps the extant city of that name in the Tonṭaimaṇṭalam area of the 
Tamil country85) to the “villagers of Vēsantha in Nādattapādi and to the Mahāmātras, 
Adhyakṣas, Rājapuruṣas, and Cancarantas,” the oral order recorded by “Kulippoṭṭar, a 
Rahasyādhikṛt”. The village lay still in the present Guntur district of southern Andhra 
Pradesh, the northern reaches of Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam, in the east coast area between the 
Pennār River in the north and the Pennaiyār river: this will include as Frasca (Map VI 
after Frasca 1990: 3; Map 2) shows well-known centers like the state capital, the city of 
Madras (also known as Chennai), Kanchipuram in the south and Tirupati and Nellur in 
the north, the whole area containing islands of both Tamil and Telugu communities even 
today.86 We already face here the Vēnkata hills, the northern boundary of the Tamil 
country as recognized in the Sangam poems. The Kaveri delta lies still to the south, the 
eventual destination of many of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. Nāthamuni, the redactor of 
the Āḻvār hymns, was born in Viṣṇunārāyaṇapuram ca. 11th century CE and Rāmānuja, in 
the 13th century CE in Śrīperubendūr, three generations later in the same family lines, 
53 
both with signature Aparaśikhā Vedic affiliations, both still in the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam 
region. 
For the Pallava period, we have data for some 467 Brahmans arriving into the 
Tamil country, in 20 Copper Plate deeds that have survived, ranging from single families 
as with Jyeṣṭa Śarman above, to 308 families of the Taṇṭamtōṭṭam Plates of Nandivarman 
II, dated to his Regnal Year 33, 765-6 CE, with 108 families becoming interim the 
standard complement in a grāmadeya. The happenchance discovery of the original 
Copper plates,87 mostly unearthed by farmers tilling the land, suggests that the discovered 
deeds constitute only a fraction of the total, as suggested by Burton Stein for the later 
Cōḷa period.88 Of the 467 families, the Veda śākhās of 442 families are recorded in the 
plates. The Veda śākhā breakdown of these immigrants is given in Table I: 
Āpastaṃba 274 
Hiraṇyakeśi 18 
Bhāradvāja 1 
Pravacana 101 
Āśvalāyana 7 
Candogā 23 
Kātyāyana 8 
*Agniveśya 2 
*Paviḷiya 4 
*Jaiminīya 1 
Kalarakha 2 
Kaṭu 1 
54 
Goduma 2 
Table I: The Veda Śākhās of Pallava Aparaśikhās 
The followers of the Āpastaṃba tradition constitute 62% of the total, the number 
increasing to 66% if we include the closely related Hiraṇyakeśi and Bhāradvāja Sūtra 
adherents, reaching 90% (including the prarvacana adherents) for the Yajurvedis as a 
whole, giving rise eventually to the adage that every “house cat” in South India, as Witzel 
notes (1995:335), can recite the Taittirīya Saṃhita. The backbone of the Aparaśikhā 
Brahman group takes shape in this period, constituting close to 95% by the modern 
period of the Tamil country, eventually coming to define the rubric “Tamil Brahman” for 
the area.89 We do not know what Veda Sūtras the Kaḷarśa (also Kaḷarakha), Goduma 
(also Godu), and Kaṭu signified. 
The three starred items in Table 1 belong to the Pūrvaśikhā group, represented by 
five families, identifiably so from their Veda śākhās (Jaiminīya, Āgniveśya and 
“paviḻiya,” a corrupt form of Bahuvṛca but part of the Pūrvaśikha argot) although there 
may have been some Pūrvaśikhā families in the Āśvalāyana group, the Baudhāyana 
group excluding itself out, however, being all “pravacana,” the Aparaśikhā term for the 
Baudhāyana tradition.90 
The “paviḻiya” term for the bahuvṛca appellation is of exceptional interest: today, 
as noted above, it occurs only among the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, yet the four paviḻiya 
families, at least two of them, are shown coming from the villages in southern Andhra 
Pradesh (#23, Vaḍuga Śarma of Kāśyapa gotra from Nimbēi and #134, Dāmodarabhaṭṭa 
of Garga gotra from Vaṅgippāṛu), both in the Toṇṭaimanṭalam area extending northward 
into southern Andhra Pradesh, suggesting that the Pūrvaśikhās were present in areas 
55 
beyond the traditional boundaries of the Tamil country during the early era of the Pallava 
regime. It is possible as well that the families were Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās, who regularly 
share with the Nambudiris several rare Veda śākhās. The term occurs, designating a 
Veda śākhā at NDP: 1611-12: 
Candōgā! Pauḻiyā! Taittirīyā! Cāmavēdiyinē! neṭumālē 
Anto! ninnaṭiyanṛimaṟṟiyēn aḻuntūrmēlticainin ammānē 
It is of interest in the above that there are two terms for the Sāmaveda: one Candogā, the 
Aparaśikhā śākhā, beginning to be known in the Tamil county among the Brahmans 
coming under the Pallava grāmadeya system and the other neutral Sāmaveda, possibly 
designating the Jaiminīya śākhā of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, being the Veda śākhā of 
Maturakavi, one of the four Brahman Āḻvārs and the figure supplying the corpus 
Nālāyiradivyaprabhadam to the Aparaśikhā Nāthamuni in the Vaiṣṇava tradition. 
We must also note that the Pūrvaśikhā presence in the Pallava epigraphy is 
practically non-existent, seven families of the total of 467, showing that they were not 
part of the grāmadeya deeds, near autochthons by now in the Tamil country; it also marks 
the relative eclipse of the group in the Tamil country, being reduced, as noted above, to a 
small minority eventually. On the other hand, the epigraphy also shows that the 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans are the group sponsored primarily and brought in by the Pallavas. 
It would seem that the Pallavas adopted in return the Bhāradvāja gotra, the predominant 
gotra of the Aparaśikhās, regularly attested upto 30% in some gotra samples I have 
studied, leading to the Tamil saying, “half of Brahmans are Bhāradvājas” (“pāppānil pāti 
pāratvācam”).91 
56 
A line (l. 198) in the Tanṭantōṭṭam Plates noted above reads: pārataṃ 
vā[ci]ppānukku ppaṅgonrum (“one share for the Bhārata reader”)—in 789 CE. What 
recension was read by this person in the temples? We do not know. Our hypothesis is 
that the *Pūrvaśikhā text is in existence in the Tamil country at this time, as our Σ-text 
facing the Sukthankar-σ-text. Did the epic, corresponding to the Sukthankar-σ text, come 
with the Aparaśikhā Brahmans? I list below what would be a “learning quotient” of the 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans from the Pallava grāmadeya deeds: 
Dvivedi 1 
Trivedi 41 
Caturvedi 129 
Kramavittan 36 
Ṣaḍaṅgavit 40 
Somayājis 23 
Vasantayāji 1 
Sarvakratuyāji 3 
Vājapeyi 1 
Table II: The Aparaśikhā Vedic Titles 
It is true that titles, especially ones like caturvedi, are not always, as Louis Renou noted, 
to be taken literally.92 Nevertheless, we have here (as with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans 
earlier) a fairly elite group moving from one part of the country to another, and it stands 
to reason that a Mahābhārata traveled with them, most likely, by the 8th century CE or 
57 
later, a vulgate Northern Recension text. The Aparaśikhā migration was to continue in 
this fashion to well-nigh pre-modern times, the last deeds of the brahmadeyas occurring 
in the Nāyaka period,93 giving us the veritable modern Tamil Brahman. 
Yet the *Pūrvaśikhā text resident with the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās in the Tamil 
country as the Σ-text dictates the terms of reaction between it and the in-coming, 
Sukthankar σ-text of the Aparaśikhā Northern Recension. It seems improbable at first 
consideration, but as noted, it accords, on the other hand, perfectly well with the 
development of the texts of the emerging Vaiṣṇava movement. As we have already 
noted, the founding Āḻvār text, the NDP, begins its career, in part, with the Śōḻiya 
Pūrvaśikhā’s Bhakti compositions in Tamil, depending upon the Mahabharata Σ-text, 
specifically its Harivaṃśa, for its Kṛṣṇāism: it is these texts that are collected by the 
Aparaśikhā immigrant, Nāthamuni, with the north Indian name Miśra still common in his 
circles, and fashioned into the founding text of Śrīvaiṣṇavism (see below). 
We do not have a similarly concrete narrative as regards the interaction between 
northern and southern strands in the case of the Mahābhāratha. That is to say, we do not 
have a Nāthamuni-like figure orchestrating the formation of the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu 
version of the epic. However, it would seem that the *Pūrvaśikhā text of the Śōḻiya 
Pūrvaśikhās functioned like the Āḻvār compositions, providing the basis for the emerging 
Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu versions of the Southern Recension, most likely, as I argue 
below, in the Tanjavur Nāyaka courts. 
C. iii. The Cōḷa Period Epigraphy and the Aparaśikhā Brahmans 
58 
When the Pallava imperium comes to an end in the first decades of the 10th 
century CE—we need to remind ourselves (Mahalingam 1983: xxvii) that it began almost 
with the Guptas, in the early 4th century, outlasting them by two centuries, indeed 
reaching its apex with the long rule of Nandivarman II from 731 to 792, well after the 
decline of the Gupta period in the north—the system of the grāmadeya passes on 
seamlessly to the Cōḷa empire. The story that Burton Stein (1968; 1982) tells of the 
Brahman alliance with the land-owning Vēḷḷāḷa group under the local, segmentary control 
of the Cōḷa rule is essentially that of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, and he estimates that 
there were some 300 grāmadeya deeds in the Cōḷa period—with the rider about this being 
a fraction of the original number. Champakalakshmi (2001) shows that the Cōḷa 
brahmadeya system builds on the Pallava practice by designating certain brhmadeya units 
as tankūṛu (taniyūr) as “separate unit[s] of political-economic significance from the early 
tenth century [CE]” (65), a total of 22 such “rural-urban continuums” attested so far in 
the Cōḷa realm. 
All the same, it has not been noticed how strikingly similar the practice of the 
Cōḷa period (ca. 900-1350 CE) is to that of the Pallava period:94 essentially the same 
infrastructure supervises the same Aparaśikhā Brahmans, most, followers of the 
Āpastaṃba Sūtra, entering the Tamil country from an immediate domicile in southern 
Andhra Pradesh, and many more Daśapuriyans. Besides, the epigraphy clearly shows a 
gradual increase in the numbers per deed of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans arriving in the 
Tamil country, the earliest Pallava deeds being brahmadeya, in which the recipients of 
the royal bounty are single families and later ones grāmadeya, in which a number of 
families, eventually becoming 108, come to be settled in a village with various privileges 
59 
stipulated relating to taxes, water rights, access paths and other such matters—the entire 
process achieving a greater level of sophistication and organization in the Cōḷa institution 
of tankūṛu. And because their śrauta traditions place them in the Mathurā region in north- 
central India, covering areas in the north in Hariyana and eastern Panjab, western 
Rajastan and the entire Malva region in the south and east we can say that the era of the 
Aparaśikhā migration begins with the arrival of the Huns in northwest South Asia (5th 
century CE) and continues un-interrupted with the Islamic conquests. To be sure, in the 
grāmadeya deeds, these Brahmans are also immediately from their domiciles in southern 
Andhra Pradesh, but originating eventually in the northwest, in the Malva country and its 
immediate northwest, the Eastern Panjab, the original Āpastaṃba home. 
Not many of the Cōḷa Copper Plates have come to light yet, but one spectacular 
find gives us three times the data of the entire Pallava epigraphy, the Karandai plates, 
weighing in at nearly 250 pounds of copper and miraculously unearthed in a field in the 
village of Puttūr in Papanāśam Taluk and Tanjavur District ca. 1920’s.95 Planned as a 
grand grant to 1080 families by Rajendra I, the entire process lasting almost two years, 
1019-1021 CE, Tribhuvanamahādāvic-caturvēdimaṅgalam, named for the king’s mother, 
was made up from some 52 villages, covering a total area of 20,305 acres, almost the 
entire southern part of today’s Papanasam Taluk in the south and extending to the 
Mannargudi Taluk in the northeast of the Tanjavur district. 
I give below the Veda śākhā distributions of the Brahmans of the Karandai Plates 
in Table III below: 60 
Āpastaṃba 615 
Hiraṇyakeśi 42 
Bhāradvāja 11 
Āgastya 29 
Baudhāyana 54 
*Āgniveśya 2 
Āśvalāyana 154 
*Ś/Jāmbavya 4 
Drāhyāyana 77 
*Jaiminīya 41 
Kātyāyana 50 
Table III: The Veda Śākhās of the Karandai Plates Brahmans 
Essentially this is the Aparaśikhā profile of the Pallava plates above. The 
adherents of the Āpastaṃba Sūtra and related Sūtra traditions amount to 62% of the total, 
almost the same ratio as with the Pallava grant. “Pravacana,” the Aparaśikhā term for 
the Baudhāyana Sūtra, is absent here: the 54 Baudhāyana families could thus be from 
either Aparaśikhā or Pūrvaśikhā group, as is the case with the 154 Āśvalāyana families. 
We encounter a significant number of Vājanaseyi adherents, following the Kāṇva 
recension of the white Yajurveda as well, 50, many of them carrying the title 
kramavittan—trained to recite the birth Veda upto the krama vikṛti level. The Agastya 
Sūtra designates a Yajurveda tradition and seems to be confined to the Aparaśikhā 
Brahmans96 
On the other hand, the starred items are signature Pūrvaśikhā sūtras: 47 families 
of the 1080, all moving from the western parts of the Tamil country to the eastern parts. 
61 
Here we note a new Pūrvaśikhā Veda sūtra, the Ś/Jāṃbavya, a close branch of the 
Kauṣītaki Ṛgveda tradition (Oldenberg 1884; Gonda 1977: 606)97 with four followers. 
Considering the date of the Karandai Plates (1029-31 CE), it is most probable that the 
Jāṃbavya Sūtra of the Ṛgveda would be found among the Tamil Pūrvaśikhās, almost 
certainly among the Śōḻiya Brahmans.98 
We should note as well that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans of the Karandai Plates are 
not domiciled in the villages of the southern Andhra Pradesh: it will be recalled that the 
four “paviḻiya” adherents of the Pallava Plates, almost three centuries earlier, were from 
the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam area. The bulk of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans of the Plates, as 
Krishnan notes with emphasis, are also from this area.99 On the other hand, the 41 
Jaiminīya Brahmans of the Karandai Plates—the Brahmans that we can unambiguously 
identify as Śōḻiya Brahmans as with the Jambavya and Āgniveśya adherents--come from 
the following domiciles, all recognizably of the Tamil country: Kōṭṭaiyūr: 2; Emappērūr: 
1; Ādanūr:7; Palurūr:1; Puḷḷamaṅgalam 10; Marudūr 2; Pulvāvūr 1; Tiṭṭakuṭi:2; 
Iṭaiyāṟṟukuṭi:5; Māruṇdūr:4; Anbil: 3; Nāraṇamaṅgalam: 1; Cātthamaṅgalam:1; 
Aruvalam: 1. Moreover, as noted already, some of the adherents of the Āśvalāyana and 
Baudhāyana Sūtras may also be Pūrvaśikhās, indeed cohorts of the Jaiminīyas, as several 
of them are from the same Tamil villages as the Jaiminīya Śōḻiyas. 
All the same, the dominance of the signature Aparaśikhā Veda śākhās, already 
clear in the Pallava period, is even greater in the Karandai Plates: more than 800 belong 
to Veda śākhās recognizable as those of the Aparaśikhā group. The largest single group, 
at 615, is made up of the adherents of the Āpastaṃba Sūtra, with another 33, of the 
closely related Hiraṇyakeśi and Bhāradvāja. The 77 Drāhyāyana adherents represent a 
62 
robust Aparaśikhā Sāmaveda tradition, no doubt the back bone of the Aparaśikhā 
Śrautism attested in the Plates, a strength that is still extant among the Aparaśikhā 
Brahmans in the Tanjavur-Kumbakonam area. 
Some 500 families, all following the signature Aparaśikhā Veda śākhās, carry the 
last name daśapuriyan, derived from the city of that name in Malva, increasing from its 
30 occurrences out of the Pallava total of 467, pointing to the origins of the Aparaśikhā 
group in north-central and northwestern regions, along the Narmadā, Chambal, and 
Yamunā banks. 
As for the Pallava Brahmans, I give in Table 4 a breakdown of the “learning 
quotient” of the Karandai Brahmans: Trivedi 1 Caturvedi 2 Ṣaḍaṅgavit 4 Kramavittan 118 Āhitāgni 4 Somayāji 28 Kāṭaka- Somayāji 
3 
Vasantayāji 3 Kāṭaka- Sarvakratu Vasantayāji 
1 
Sarvakratu 1 Agnicittayāji 2 Vājapeyi 1 Atirātran 1 Sahasran 151 
Table IV: The Learning Quotient of the Karandai Families 
There are almost 50 Śrautins in the group (of which 5 are identifiably 
Pūrvaśikhās, being Jaiminīyas, of a total of 41 [12.5%], indicating a robust śrauta 
tradition among the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās in the 11th century CE; the one Atirātran may also 
be a Pūrvaśikhā Brahman, this being the term still in use among the Nambudiri 
63 
Pūrvaśikhās to signify a ritualist who has performed the Agnicayana), with another 118 
Brahmans who can recite the Vedas upto the krama vikṛti. In other words, the in-coming 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans continue to be drawn from the same elite levels as in the Pallava 
period, a trend that is to continue, further justifying the assumption that a version of 
Mahābhārata epic, almost certainly a Vulgate text by now, came with them. 
C. iv. The Emergence of the Aparaśikhā Śrīvaiṣṇavism 
One way to approach the development of the eventual Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu 
Mahābhārata of the Aparaśikhās is to approach it in the perspective of a precedent. Such 
a precedent exists in the formation of the texts and traditions of the mature Śrīvaiṣṇavism 
by the Aparaśikhā Brahmans from the Āḻvār songs, collected in the 
Nālāyiradivyaprabhandham by an Aparaśikhā Brahman. This is, as noted earlier, the 
famous Nāthamuni, generally thought to have been born in 11th century, in 
Vīranārāyaṇapuram, very much the village of the Pallava-Cōḷa epigraphy, perhaps a first 
generation Aparaśikhā immigrant, among, as noted above, people still with the northern 
name, Miśra (Carman 1973: 24).100 Once hearing a decad of the still uncollected NDP 
the pāsuram, Āravamudē (3194) by singers from the “west” (the traditional Cōḷa area 
along the Kaveri river west from Nāthamuni’s Vīranārāyaṇapuram in the relatively 
northern and eastern Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam-Arcot area, the region of the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās 
who supply all the Brahman Āḻvārs), tradition has it that Nāthamuni seeks out and 
collects the songs into the extant text, the Nālāyiradivyaprabhandam, setting it besides to 
music, inaugurating the great performance tradition of the aṛaiyars in the Viṣṇu temples 
64 
of Tamil Nadu. And the figure from whom he is able to collect the 4000-verse long text 
is Maturakavi, a Jaiminīya Sāmavedi and hence unambiguously a Pūrvaśikhā Brahman. 
However, and this is the other half of the reaction, tradition has him also bring to 
the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism northern texts and practices as well (the counterpart of the 
Sukthankar σ-text), as set forth in his Nyāya Tatva and Yoga Rahasya, laying the 
foundation through his grandson and disciple, Yāmuna, to the Pañcarātra-Āgama 
tradition (Carmen 1973: 25), the entire line of development culminating in Rāmānuja, 
Yāmuna’s grandson. We know that Rāmānuja belonged to the signature Aparaśikhā 
sūtra of Āpastaṃba, belonging in addition, as noted above, to the vaṭama group, hailing 
from Śriperumbedur, in the Tonṭaimaṇṭalam area, near Kanchipuram and a descendant of 
Nāthamuni on his mother’s side.101 
I noted above that the Bhāgavata Purāṇa is a literary expression of this religious 
synthesis. Dated to ca. 9th century CE, very much in the period of Nāthamuni, the 
Bhāgavata Purāṇa incorporates, as Dihejia shows,102 many elements of the Āḻvār 
Vaiṣṇavism, but addressing at the same time an extra-Tamil audience, in the north, still 
no doubt a place historical memory for many Aparaśikhās, with Nāthamuni himself going 
to Mathurā on a long sojourn and coming back to the peninsula only when compelled by 
a vision of the deity of his natal village commanding him to return (Carman: 24-25). 
Indeed, when the great Śrīvaiṣṇava schism into “vaṭakalai” (northern) and “tenkalai” 
(southern) occurs in the post-Rāmānuja period, the vaṭakalai branch is seen to be made up 
of entirely Aparaśikhā Brahmans, with Tirupati in the north, outside the northern 
boundary of the modern state of Tamil Nadu, as its center, with the tenkalai school, 
located in the south, in Śrī Rangam, Śrīvilliputhūr and Āḷvārtirunagarī, orienting itself to 
65 
the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism and Tamil, its language. The tenkalai branch is made up both of 
the Aparaśikhā and the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās, the latter less than 15% of the smaller tenkalai 
group and relegated to a low social status among the Śrī Vaiṣṇavas, although originally 
among the founders of Āḻvār-Vaiṣṇavism.103 
C. v. The Tamil (Grantha) and Telugu versions of the Mahābhārata 
It is in the perspective of the above precedent that we must approach the 
formation of the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu versions of the Mahābhārata. In both cases, we 
have a resident tradition hosting an immigrant tradition, giving rise to broader and larger 
developments in both cases, the Bhāgavatapurāṇa in the Vaiṣṇava tradition, the summum 
bonum of the Śrīvaiṣṇava precedent, and the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu versions of the 
Mahābhārata, its epic counterpart. However, as we noted, we have very little concrete 
information about the precise details of how the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu versions of the 
epic developed: we do not have the equivalent of an iconic figure like Nāthamuni of the 
Vaiṣṇava tradition, the figure who weaves the southern Āḻvār and the northern Pañcarātra, 
its σ-text, into Śrīvaiṣṇavism of the Tamil country through Yāmuna first and Rāmānuja 
thence. It is quite possible that the Villipputhūr Mahābhārata represents a stage in the 
development of the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu Mahābhārata. Śrī Villipputhur is 
traditionally a Pūrvaśikhā agrahāram, the birth place of Periyāḷvār and Āṇdāḷ, two of the 
four Pūrvaśikhā Brahman Āḻvārs. The author of the Tamil translation of the epic is 
named after the village and traditionally considered to be a Śrī Vaiṣṇava Brahman, and 
dated to the Tamil Middle Ages (12th to 13th CE) although we do not know if he was a 
66 
Pūrvaśikhā or the Aparaśikhā type.104 We know that the Villipputhūr text served as the 
fundamental source for the Tamil kūthu repertory, in the non-Brahman circles.105 Being a 
center of the emerging Śrīvaiṣṇavism, second perhaps only to Śri Rangam, being in 
regular contact with this bigger center, Śrī Villipputhur may well have been the center of 
reaction between the two recensions in the Tamil country, with the final phases of it 
occurring in the Nāyaka period, in the 16th -17th centuries, as P.P.S.Sastri pointed out, in 
his Southern Recension edition of the Mahābhārata,106 made from pretty much the same 
Tamil(Grantha)-Telugu manuscripts of the Sarasvatī Mahāl Library of Tanjavur that went 
to Poona for the collation and preparation of the Critical Edition. 
C. vi. The Grantha and Telugu Mahābhārata and the Poona Critical Edition 
We have from the first half of the 16th century a kāvya work titled 
Viśvāguṇadarśacampū107 by a Veṅkatādhvarin, identified as “an orthodox Śrī Vaiṣṇava 
Tamil Brahman” (Rao et al 1992: 1) with his name ādhvarin deriving from adhvaryu, the 
main śrauta priest and belonging to the Yajurveda. Purporting to be an aerial journey 
over the Tamil country by two gāndharvas, conversing between them on the earthly 
sights below, the poem is an objective representation of the final Aparaśikhā ‘possession’ 
of the Tamil country, an aerial map literally laid over the territory of the Pallava-Cōḻa and 
subsequent grāmadeya epigraphy about the Aparaśikhā Brahmans. The gāndharvas begin 
their peninsular journey at the Karnataka Aparaśikhā centers at Udupi and Melkote and, 
flying due east to Tirupati, the most important, by the time of the poem, vaṭakalai, and 
thus all-Aparaśikhā, center of Tamil Śrīvaiṣṇavism, they turn southward and retrace the 
path of the Aparaśikhā immigration, covering the entire region of the Pallava and Cōḷa 
67 
epigraphy, starting with Kanchipuram in the northeast, coming to the Kaveri river banks 
stretching from Śri Rangam through Tanjavur to Kumbakonam in the east, the Tanjavur- 
Kumabakonam-Mannarkode area, and south to the Tāṃṛavarṇī delta (Map V after Map 1 
in Rao [1992] et al.) The gāndharvas notice the author’s village, Vīkṣāraṇya, not far from 
Ramanuja’s village at Sriperumbudūr, both in all likelihood villages of the Pallava-Cōḻa 
gramadeya system, a system the Nāyakas continued. 
We know that poets like Venkatādhvarin above found patronage with the Nāyaka 
chieftains, the latter, Telugu-speaking, coming south to the Tamil country with the 
dissolution of the Vijayanagara empire, and establishing themselves as rulers there, the 
“little kings” eventually with “hollow crowns”.108 Indeed Veṅkatādhvarin is himself 
linked to the Señji Nāyakas, and his poem partakes of what has been identified with the 
Nāyaka ethos, centering around the theme of the “unknown, unpedigreed warrior who 
fights his way into power and a kingdom of his own” (Rao et al. 1992: 7). Moreover, the 
Nāyaka courts produced “an enormous corpus of Sanskrit works, reflect[ing] the 
accumulated erudition of late medieval south India” (336), altogether a fitting 
environment for what P.P.S.Sastri has called the “Nāyaka excesses” of the Grantha- 
Telugu Mahābhārata. 
This is particularly true in the case of Tanjavur, which by all account went 
through a brief renaissance—beginning thus a journey toward the eventual capital of 
Brahmanical culture of the Tamil country--under its three Nāyaka kings, Accutappa 
Nāyaka (1564-1612), his son Raghunātha Nāyaka (1600-1634) and his son 
Vijayarāghava Nāyaka (1631-1673). The famous Govinda Dīkṣita begins his career as 
the King’s Minister with the first of the three Nāyakas, providing tutelage and a splendid 
68 
education for the middle Nāyaka, a Renaissance prince in every respect,109 and his son, 
Yagnanārāyaṇa Dīkṣita, continuing his father’s cultural and artistic leadership. The 
Tanjavur court was the host to many poets and musicians, with Raghunātha Nāyaka 
actually fashioning the extant vīṇa of the Carnatic musical tradition. As Krishnasvami 
Aiyangar (1941: [II] 296), a 20th century descendant from the grāmadeya village of the 
third Nāyaka--called at the time of the grant Raghunāthapuram in honor of his father but 
now Śakkoṭṭai--notes, Raghunātha Nāyaka “held a competition among the ladies of the 
court, several of [whom] could compose poetry in the four kinds. They were also expert 
in resolving curious literary puzzles. Some of them could compose hundred verses in “an 
hour” and write poetry in eight languages. One lady of the court by name 
Rāmabhadrāmba was accorded first place in this and was installed as the “empress 
among poets” (sāhityasāmrājya) which probably involved the honor of kanakābhiṣeka 
(bathing [sic] in gold)”. Thus we have every reason to think that the Tanjavur court 
functioned as a nursery for the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu versions of the Southern 
Recension, with their inflationary excesses. 
We must note that Tanjavur’s famed Sarasvatī Mahāl Library, the final source110 
of the manuscripts of the Tamil (Grantha) and Telugu Mahābhārata for the Poona editors 
began its life as the Sarasvatī Bhandār in the early 17th century under Raghunātha 
Nāyaka. This tradition of scholarship and respect for the arts continued after the 
Maharashtrian take-over of Tanjavur in late 17th century, in 1674 CE, with Sarasvatī 
Bhandār metamorphosing into the Sarasvatī Mahāl Library and acquiring vast numbers of 
manuscripts from Benares, under Serfoji II, during his famous pilgrimage to the holy city 
in 1832 with a retinue exceeding 3000. True, some Maharashtrian Brahmans came to 
69 
Tanjavur with the Maharashtrian conquest and rule, but there is little doubt that the city’s 
intellectual and cultural life was entirely the creation of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, long 
prepared for their eminent role through the historical processes described by Burton Stein 
(1982). A roll call would include such names as Appayya Dīkṣitar (1520-1593); Govinda 
Dīkṣita and his son, Yagnanārāyaṇa Dīkṣita; and later, the musical trinity of composers of 
the Carnatic music, all from Tanjavur, all anecdotally Aparaśikhā Brahmans. In all 
likelihood, the final form of the Tamil (Grantha) and Telugu Mahābhārata takes shape in 
this period, 16th to 17th centuries, CE. 
* * * * * * * 
Section D. Brāhmī Paleography and the Southern Recension Texts 
Impressive proof for the above links between the history of Brahman migration 
and the textual history of the SR of the Mahābhārata is furnished by the history of the 
Brāhmī scripts and their various derivatives, as it has been re-constructed by Iravatam 
Mahadevan (2003). We must keep in mind we cannot have a textual tradition without a 
phonologically appropriate script, linking, in other words, the epic to the relevant human 
agency, the third correlate in the equation. I begin with Mahadevan’s master chart for the 
entire development: 
3rd Century BCE Brāhmī 
____________________ |_____________________ | | | | 2nd Century BCE Southern Brāhmī Tamil Brāhmī 70 
| | 1st Century BCE |---------------------------------------------------------------- | | | | | Bhattripolu | | | | | _______|_______ | | | | 5th Century CE | | | | | | | | Vaṭṭeḻuttu 6th Century CE | | | Proto-Telugu | | and Kannada | | | Grantha | | | | 7th Century CE _______ |______ | | | | |___________________________________ | Telugu Kannada | | | | Tamileḻuttu | | | | | |___________________________________ | 
| 14th Century Malayalam-Āryeḻuttu 
We see that the Brāhmī script devolves into two separate and independent lines of 
developments, starting with the Southern Brāhmī and Tamil Brāhmī, arriving in 
peninsular India separately and giving rise to the five major historical scripts of the area, 
Telugu, Kannada, Grantha, on the one hand, and Tamil and Malayalam, on the other. 
The Southern Brāhmī script is seen to give rise to the first three, the Kannada and Telugu 
scripts emerging from an intermediate proto-script of the parent Southern Brāhmī and the 
Grantha, more directly from it. This latter fact has great significance for us. On the other 
hand, the Tamil Brāhmī script is seen first to evolve into Vaṭṭeḻuttu, which from reaction 
with the Southern Brāhmī derivative, Grantha, gives us the Āryeḻuttu script of Malayalam 
and Tamileḻuttu script of Tamil, (the latter, as we will see below but not shown in 
71 
Mahadevan’s chart, showing a further influence of a Northern Brāhmī script—what we 
may call the σ-script after Sukthankar’s use of the Greek letter for the NR text that comes 
south with the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, from about 8th century CE, the period of the 
Aparaśikhā migration.) 
These paleographical facts have significant bearing on the arguments presented 
above on the different genealogies of the Mahābhārata epic and their agents of 
transmission, the Brahman groups, that came to the peninsular India, starting with the 
Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, arriving in the Tamil country well enough in time to take part in 
the production of the poetries of the Sangam period, and the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, 
arriving almost half a millennium afterward, under the Pallava patronage, from 5th 
century CE. 
It is useful to consider the problem in its three main aspects: 
i. Introduction and an over-view of Mahadevan’s findings 
ii. the Tamil Brāhmī script and its history 
iii. the Southern Brāhmī script and its history 
iv. the Brahmans, the epics and paleography 
D. i. Introduction and an Over-view of Mahadevan’s Findings 
As Mahadevan (2003: 315) shows, the Tamil Brāhmī script is attested in the 3rd 
century BCE Jain cave inscriptions, starting with those of the Māṅgulam caves, around 
Madurai in the Pāṇṭiyan territory, the Pāṇṭiyan kings being thus the earliest and in the 
early period the most frequent hosts and patrons to the Jain monks and the Jain religion. 
72 
It is quite likely that the indigenous Tamil society at this time was largely oral, as Hart 
(1975:157) has argued, still in the phase of the pāṇan songs and their oral traditions and 
the latter in the process of beginning to become the templates for the literate and 
decidedly literary overlays of the Sangam songs, as they have come down to us. The 
Tamil Brāhmī script evolves over the next four centuries, providing the script for the 
Sangam-era compositions, dating from ca. 50 BCE to 200 CE, transforming into an early 
form of the Vaṭṭeḻuttu script by ca. 6th century CE and mature Vaṭṭeḻuttu script afterward. 
Correspondingly, the language itself changes from Old Tamil (250 BCE to 100 CE), 
represented by Tolkāppiyam and probably some Puṛanānūṛu songs, to middle Old Tamil 
(100 to 400 CE), represented by bardic poems on love and war collected in the Eṭṭutokai 
and Pattuppāṭṭu anthologies, into Late Old Tamil, (400-700 CE) with the two epics, 
Cilappatikāram and Manimēkalai, as its representative texts (Lehman 1994; Takahashi 
1995; Steever 2004). The key point to note here is that there is a complete fit between 
Tamil phonology and Tamil Brāhmī script, and the body of Saṅgam, “academy” 
literature, cited so from the 7th century onward to signify the canon of the academy, 
cāṇṛor ceyyuḷ, “poetry of the nobles” (Steever 2004: 1037), runs into some 32,000 lines 
(Lehman 1998: 75). 
The Southern Brāhmī script constitutes, on the other hand, an independent 
derivation from the parent Brāhmī script (Mahadevan 2003: 176), arising at the same 
time as the Tamil Brāhmī script, but it provides an entirely different history. The modern 
languages of Kannada and Telugu are the outcome at one line of development, thus 
through the western areas of the peninsular regions, but it gives rise to the Grantha script 
73 
in the eastern parts, in the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam region, appearing in epigraphy ca. 6th century 
CE, with what is considered to be the first Grantha inscription (213). 
We do not have much information in Mahadevan about their parallel evolutions 
other than that, at its attestation, the Tamil Brāhmī script is already the entrenched script 
of the Tamil country, fashioned, as Mahadevan argues, in the Jain monasteries around 
Madurai in the Pāṇṭiyan kingdom, ca. 3rd century BCE, already adapted to meeting the 
requirements of the Tamil phonology. As noted, this is the script in which the literate— 
and literary--overlay of the Sangam songs on the Pāṇan oral templates by the pulavan 
(“learned”) poets takes place (Hart 1975). On the other hand, the Southern Brāhmī script 
is attested along an independent line of descent in its Grantha form only ca. 6th century 
CE (Mahadevan: 213), meeting, it should be noted, the needs of the Sanskrit phonology. 
And in Mahadevan’s scheme, the Telugu and Kannada scripts are cohorts in this 
development. 
We notice a gap of almost 600 years between the attestations of the two scripts in 
the Tamil country, the Tamil Brāhmī script by 250 BCE and the Southern Brāhmī script 
by 6th century CE, the first meeting Tamil phonology and the second meeting, the 
Sanskrit phonology. Because of the efflorescence of the Saṅgam poetry in this period of 
600 years—largely in Old Middle Tamil and in Tamil Brāhmī script--we do not raise the 
question if there was literary activity in the peninsular region in Sanskrit in the same time 
period. We have already noted that a substantial number of these poets of Saṅgam poetry 
were Brahmans, wearing the pūrvaśikhā and using the Tamil Brāhmī syllabary to 
compose the songs. Was there no composition among them simultaneously in Sanskrit? 
And if so what script served them? These questions lead in turn to a fundamental 
74 
question: if the Jains brought with them a script (the parent Tamil Brāhmī script) with 
them, did the Brahmans bring with them a script? 
Yet this question is never posed. Consider for instance this statement by Lehman 
(1998:75), “During this period [Sangam], with the propagation of Jainism and Buddhism 
in South India a number of Prakrit and Sanskrit borrowing entered Old Tamil and appear 
in Sangam anthologies (my parenthetical gloss).” The arrival of Brahmanism is not 
similarly posed as an alien influence, presumably because the later Hinduism subsumes 
both Brahmans and non-Brahmans as one group in the Tamil country in contrast to the 
Buddhists and Jains. Yet for this period, Brahmanism in the form of its Śrauta ethos is 
just as alien in the cultural ecology of the Tamil country, and as Sangam poetry shows by 
far the most dominant. For instance, Mahadevan considers the presence of Buddhism in 
the Brāhmī inscriptions to be negligible, something that can be said with equal justice for 
its presence in Sangam anthologies as well. Jainism is the dominant religion in the 
inscriptions, but tapering off in time and almost totally eclipsed in Sangam literature. On 
the other hand, as we will see, the Brahman presence, just as alien in the context as the 
Jain and Buddhist, is on the ascendance. It is almost completely unattested in the Tamil- 
Brāhmī inscriptions, but as an alien presence, it dominates the Sangam anthologies: a 
good percentage of the Sangam poets are Brahmans; śrautism is decidedly extolled, a 
king coming to be named after the ritual hall where the sacrificial animal is immolated, 
the Pāṇṭiyan King, Paliayākacālai Muṭukuṭumip Peruvaḻuti. 
This poses a fundamental question to the recensional history of the epic: if the SR 
text arose as the *Pūrvaśikhā text in my chart in the first millennium of the CE, what 
script could have served the composition? We have placed the epic in the form of a 
75 
*Śārada text and a human agency in the form of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans in the scene; 
we have now to place a script in the region, a script that can meet Sanskrit phonology. It 
is easy to see that the only option we have is the Southern Brāhmī derivative, the Grantha 
script. Thus, I would be arguing that the SR *Pūrvaśikhā text begins its life in a 
*Southern Brāhmī script, Grantha, or an early form of it, being the most logical 
candidate. Mahadevan (213) considers the Grantha script to be derived from Southern 
Brāhmī of the Prākṛt Charters of the Early Pallavas, 4-5th centuries CE. If my scenario 
that the SR rises in the first centuries of the CE, soon after the arrival of the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans in the peninsular India with a *Śārada text of the epic is valid, the only script 
that can meet the demands of the literate composition of the SR is the Grantha script. I 
would be arguing below thus that a form of the Southern Brāhmī script, substantially 
similar or identical with this, arrived in the Tamil country with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans 
and was already present in the area when the Pallava reign begins. The attestation of the 
paviḻiya adherents, ca. 9th century CE, in the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam area in the Pallava 
epigraphy, suggests that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans were present in this area as well, 
around Vēṇkata hills, after their dakṣināpatha migration. This is also the area of the 
Prākṛt Charters of the early Pallavas, which display the first epigraphic evidence of the 
Grantha script. 
In sum, then, both the Tamil Brāhmī and the Southern Brāhmī scripts originate 
from a common parental *Brāhmī script (Mauryan?) and both are attested only in 
peninsular India, but at entirely different time intervals, the first by ca. 2rd century BCE 
and the second by only ca. 6th century CE. The Tamil Brāhmī script, eventually 
becoming the Vaṭṭeḻuttu of the Tamil-Kerala country, meets the linguistic needs of the 
76 
Tamil language in the area, most significantly that of the Sangam poetry. On the other 
hand, the Southern Brāhmī scripts must be seen, in some incipient form of the later 
Grantha script, as the vehicle of the Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata, when it 
takes shape, in the first centuries of the Current Era in the same area. 
D. ii. The Tamil Brāhmī Script 
Based on Mahadevan’s chart given above, we can say that the Tamil Brāhmī 
arrived in South India in 3rd century BCE, and it was brought to peninsular India by the 
Jains, arriving there from the north, it is widely accepted, through Karnataka in the west 
and not through the Vēnkatam hills of the later Brahman migrations: it is likely, as 
Mahadevan (135) notes, that “Tamil Brāhmī script was adapted from the Mauryan 
Brāhmī in the Jain monasteries (‘paḷḷi’) of the Madurai regions sometime before the end 
of the third century BCE” (Mahadevan’s parenthesis). In the Early Period (3rd to 1st 
centuries BCE) in Mahadevan’s chronology, out of 30 sites with 86 Tamil-Brāhmī 
inscriptions, in Early Old Tamil, 28 sites with 84 inscriptions pertain to Jainism, and they 
are mostly in the Pāṇṭiyan region, around Madurai, leaving, as Mahadevan notes (128) 
“no longer any doubt that the Tamil-Brāhmī cave inscriptions are mostly associated with 
the Jaina faith.” In the Middle Period (1st to 3rd centuries CE), the period of the Middle 
Old Tamil, there is a sharp decline in cave inscriptions, and this is accompanied by a 
striking shift of Jainism from the Pāṇṭiyan kingdom to the Karur-based Cēra region, with 
the main trope of the inscriptional passages—the grant of the cave shelter to a Jain monk 
by a ruler—continuing, as for instance in the case of the Pugalūr site on the southern 
banks of the Kaveri river 15 kilometers northwest of Karur, dated to 3rd century CE (405- 
77 
421; Items 61 through 72). By Late Period (3rd to 5th centuries), that of the Late Old 
Tamil, the natural cave inscriptions come to an end, with the Sittanavasal B site (451- 
461; Items 101 through 109), already in early Vaṭṭeḻuttu, being the last of the Jain cave 
shelters—giving way as well to a new kind of Jaina monuments in the form of nicītikai 
(← Kannada inscr. nisidige [Mahadevan: 632]) inscriptions, denoting a “seat of 
penance...where a Jaina monk performs the religious penance of fasting unto death” 
(Mahadevan: 632), the sallēkhana death (“death by starvation”) at Paṛaiyanpaṭṭu and 
Tirunātharkunru (470-473; #s 115 and 116 in Mahadevan’s numeration), ca. 6th century 
CE. 
We are no longer in the oral society of the itinerant pāṇans now but in a fully 
literate period of Tamil history, the lasting legacy of Jainism, as Mahadevan (139) notes, 
to the Tamil history, leading to the efflorescence of the Sangam literature of the early 
centuries, CE.111 As Hart (1975) has conclusively argued, the Sangam poetry is a 
literate—and literary—copy created by a written overlay on the original oral templates of 
the pāṇan songs.112 The Tamil Brāhmī script gives us a script for this overlay, as indeed 
already suggested by Hart (147), the script in which these poems were written, 
presumably with an iron stylus on palm leaves, the stylus held in the tightly closed, 
ritually correct right fist, the technique and practice of the mode of writing, producing in 
time, presumably, the circular shape of the Vaṭṭeḻuttu script. We are at the juncture of the 
rise of the historical Tamil script, Tamil-eḻuttu, adapted, ca. 8th CE, from the Vaṭṭeḻuttu 
script and the Grantha script of the Southern Brāhmī filiation with as noted an input from 
a σ-script that came with the Aparaśikhā Brahmans: I come back to this in C. ii below. 
We must note, however, that the Vaṭṭeḻuttu script remains, at this stage, in its pure and 
78 
unalloyed form in the eastern and south-eastern parts of the Tamil country, as for instance 
in the famous Vēlvikkuṭi Plates of the 8th century, and covering besides most of the 
modern territory of Kerala. 
It is striking that in this new literature of the Sangam poetry, written in a Jain- 
invented script, the Jains and Jainism are signally absent. Other than the solitary 
Akanānūru (123)113 reference to the Jain practice of sallēkhana death, the trope, as we 
saw, of the later, 6th CE, Late Period Tamil Brāhmī-Early Vaṭṭeḻuttu inscriptions— 
marking, it should be added, a Karnataka Jain practice, and not so much Tamil—aspects 
of Jainism itself are remarkably absent in the Sangam poetry.114 We do not have as yet 
an adequate explanation for this sudden decline of Jainism through the six centuries, from 
the Early Period (3rd to 1st centuries BCE) to the Middle Period (1st to 3rd centuries CE) 
and the Late Period, (3rd to 5th centuries CE). Why are the Jains and Jainism 
unrepresented or represented so meagerly in the Sangam poetry, generally accepted to be 
in composition in the first centuries of the Current Era? 
Let us consider. The cave inscriptions testify to a deep and organized Jain 
establishment in the Tamil country from the 3rd century BCE onward. Mahadevan 
adduces (128-139) seven terms of various but precise significations for a Jain monk, from 
kaṇi (head of a gaṇa) through amaṇan (an ascetic), to upacaṇ (a lay teacher of scriptures) 
to māṇākkar, a student or novice. They appear linked to some 14 individual Jain names 
in these inscriptions: one Attiran (<Atri, a gotra term) is an amaṇan; Naṭṭi, Naṭan, Nākan, 
Nanda-Siri-Kuvan are kaṇis. We have seven dhārmic terms, like aṭittānam (< Skt. 
aṭisthāna), ‘seat’ of authority; aṛam, ‘charity or religious life’ and ‘paḷḷi,’ for hermitage, 
the last term also serving as the suffix in the names of many human settlements in the 
79 
Tamil-Kerala country. Mahadevan (139) considers thus the contribution by the Jains to 
the Tamil history “enormous” and “most basic and fundamental”. 
The inscriptional evidence shows that the first stage in the decline of Jainism, or 
its royal patronage, is marked by the cessation of cave sites in the eastern parts of the 
Tamil country, the Pāṇṭiyan kingdom, and their shift to the west, in the Karur-based Cēra 
kingdom (the Pugalūr sites, Item XX: 1 through 12; Mahadevan: 405-421), later to 
produce landmark works by Jain authors, the Cilappatikāram and Cīvakacintāmaṇi, to 
name just two of the most noted texts. We must note as well that the inscriptional 
evidence points to continuous contacts between the Tamil Jains and the Jain centers of 
the Karnataka region, a point emphasized by Mahadevan (135). 
It is useful to note that this is precisely the time period, the dawn of the Current 
Era, in which the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans arrive in the Tamil country in the scheme 
presented above in A.i and to be taken up again in C. iii. below: they are clearly and 
concretely attested in the Sangam poetry with their pūrvaśikhā kuṭumi. Like the Jains, 
they also come from the north, but not through the Karnataka region, but through the 
dakṣiṇāpatha route in the lower Godavari region, possibly at Assaka in its banks, and 
further south through the Vēnkaṭa hills, and eventually into the kingdoms of the 
mūvēndar—the land of the three Indras, the Cēra, Coḷa, and Pāṇṭiya kings, the occurrence 
of the paviḻiya term in the Pallava epigraphy of the 8th century CE still placing them in 
the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam area as late as 8th century CE. 
We have already noted that the Vedic content of the Sangam poetry is 
considerable, and that a good 10% of the Sangam poets were Brahmans. We must add to 
this the evidence from the Sangam poetry that some of the foremost patrons of the Vedic 80 
ritualism were the Pāṇṭiyan kings, erstwhile hosts to the Jain religion. Perhaps the most 
prominent of these kings is the great Paliyākacālai Muṭukuṭumip Peruvaḷuti, (of 
Puṛanānūṛu 6, 12, 15, 64)—such a patron of Vedic ritual as to be named after the 
yāgaśāla of the Vedic ritual, with the yūpa or the pole fixed just outside the eastern 
boundary of the ritual hall, on the pṛṣṭha axis, the line to the rising sun, to which the 
animal (‘bali’) is tethered to be sacrificed in a Soma class ritual. At Puṛanānūṛu 15. 11- 
17, the poet-singer, Naṭṭimaiyār, almost certainly a Brahman, celebrates this king: 
Given your fury, which of these is in greater in number 
--your once eager enemies shamed and despairing after brandishing 
their long spears that throw shadows and their beautiful shields 
embossed with iron against the power of your swift vanguard 
with its shining weapons, or else the number of spacious sites 
where you have set up columns after performing many sacrifices 
prescribed by the Four Vedas and the books of ritual 
fine sacrifices of an excellence that will not die away[.] 
Hart’s (2000) translation. 
Yet Peru-vaḻuti’s namesake first appears in the Tamil-Brāhmī Māngulam I inscriptions, 
ca. 3rd century BCE, the oldest Tamil-Brāhmī inscription in the Pāṇṭiyan region and the 
oldest Jain inscription all of India, as “Kaṭalan Vaḻuti” (Vaḻuti of the Sea’), the paṇavan 
(“servant”) of Neṭuñceḻiyan, the Pāṇṭiyan king of the Māṅgulam I inscriptions, and who 
oversees the construction of the stone bed for the Jain kaṇi, Nanda-Siri-Kuvan 
(Mahadevan 2003: 315-323; Item I, 1 through 6). “Vaḻuti” is widely attested as a generic 
81 
Pāṇṭiyan name, passing on later to Pāṇṭiyan kings—indeed, one of the two kings credited 
with the collection of two anthologies, Ainkuṛunūṛu and Akanānūṛu, being Ugra-pperu- 
vaḻuti. The Vaḻuti of the Māṅgulam I inscriptions need not thus be a direct ancestor of the 
later Muṭukuṭumip-Peruvaḻuti, the ‘big’ (peru) Vaḻuti, but the fall from favour of the Jains 
in the Pāṇṭiyan kingdom by the end of the Early Period (beginnings of the CE) of the 
Tamil Brāhmī paleography cannot be ignored. The first Vaḻuti is the paṇavan, the 
overseer of the construction of a stone bed for Nanda-Siri-Kuvan, the Jain kaṇi, whereas 
the “Big” Vaḻuti of the Sangam poetry, the patron of four of its songs, is seen to be 
synonymous with Vedic Śrautism, brought to the Tamil-Kerala country by the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans. It is clear that the Brahmans of the Sangam period—that is, a period 
synchronous with the Middle Period of the Tamil- Brāhmī paleography, 1st to 3rd CE-- 
replace the Jains of the Early Period of the Tamil Brāhmī paleography as the new 
recipients of royal patronage at the Pāṇṭiyan courts, with the Śrauta ritual, certainly more 
spectacular than the spectacles of the Jaina religion and more promising of worldly and 
other-worldly glory,115 forging the old Āryan brahma-kṣatra alliance between Brahmans 
and Kings, but now in the Tamil country, as the Rājasūya ritual of the Cōḷa king, Vēṭṭa 
Perunāṛkiḷḷi, shows. Indeed, as Hart notes (1975: 70-71), the Sangam poetry 
acknowledges, as at Puṛ.166, that “a struggle is under way between the orthodox and non- 
orthodox religions” with the Brahman (of the kauṇḍinya gotra) to whom the poem is 
addressed seen as establishing the truth “not agreeing with those who claim the true is 
false, and who realized the lie that seemed as if it were true to utterly defeat those who 
would quarrel with the one ancient book.” The śrauta ‘status kit’116 of the Brahmans 
wins the day, not for the first time, nor the last. 
82 
A corresponding Jain resentment at the Brahman usurpation of their patronage is 
not totally impossible, nor illogical, and only extreme political correctness, no doubt, a 
corrective reaction to the Brahman historiography of the Tamil country of the first five 
decades of the 20th century, would be blind to this.117 The continuous contact of the 
Tamil Jains with their Karnataka counterparts is an important element in this complex 
and changing picture. For, the next great historical event, and perhaps the most important 
in some ways of Tamil history as a whole, although not sufficiently understood, is the 
invasion of Tamil country by the Jain-Kaḷabhras from Karnataka, creating the famous 
Kaḷabhra Interregnum, the “long night” of the Tamil history in the extreme Brahman 
historiography of the subject, with the Pāṇtiyan kingdom receiving the brunt of the 
invasion.118 Thus while the Kaḷabhra’s anti-Brahmanical excesses may have been 
exaggerations of a Brahman historiography, there is wide-spread consensus that the 
Kaḷabhras were both Jain and from Karnataka, and their conquest and rule of the Tamil 
country over three centuries constituted a complete break with the classical Sangam 
period. As Mahadevan (136) notes, “[the Kaḷabhras] displaced the traditional Tamil 
monarchies and held sway over the Tamil country for nearly three centuries until they 
were expelled in the last quarter of 6th century CE by Kaṭunkōṇ, the Pāṇṭiya, from the 
south, and Simhaviṣṇu the Pallava from the north (my parenthesis).” It is an eighth 
descendant of this Kaṭuṇkōṇ, Neṭuñjaṭaiyan, who appears in the Vēḷvikkuṭi Plates (EI 
XVII (1923-24):271), restoring lands of the Vēḷvikkuṭi village to a Brahman petitioner by 
the name of Korkaikiḷan Nar Ciṅkan, originally gifted, as recorded in the plates, to his 
ancestor Korkaikiḷan Narkoṟṟan, by the great Paliyākacālai Muṭukuṭumip Peruvaḷuti of the 
Sangam poetry. 
83 
We have here a grid of three Pāṇṭian kings and three Brahman beneficiaries 
spread over some six centuries. Peruvaḷuti of the Sangam period (ca. 200 CE) gifts the 
village of Vēḷvikkuṭi to a Śrauta Brahman, Narkoṟṟan, the village acquiring its name from 
Tamil vēlvi (“sacrifice”) from Narkoṟṟtan’s śrauta ritual at the site; the Kaḷabhras 
dispossess his descendants of this gift some length of time later, perhaps two centuries. 
King Kaṭuṇkōn, in marking the end of the Kaḷabhra Interregnum, restores the Vēḷvikkuṭi 
land grant to an unnamed Brahman descendant of the original donee, ca. 620 CE, almost 
four centuries after the Peruvaḷuti grant of the Sangam period. All of this is ratified by 
King Neṭuñjaṭaiyan, the issuer of the Vēḷvikkuṭi Plates, seven kings after Kaṭuṇkōn, thus 
ca.760 CE, by affirming the right of Nar Ciṅkan, the petitioner and remote descendant, 
indeed, of the original donee, Narkoṟṟan. And Narkoṟṟan’s patron, King Peruvaḻuti of the 
Sangam period looms as the prime mover of the narrative, himself linked at least by name 
to a Vaḻuti of the Māṅgulam Plates and a patron of the Jains. We are thus witness to a 
period of Jain dominance and patronage, a Brahman usurpation of their patronage in the 
Pāṇtiyan court, a Jain disruption of the established order of the Tamil society through the 
Kaḷabhra Interregnum, and an eventual Brahman restoration. 
I would suggest that part of the disruption of the Kaḷabhra period also results in 
the break-up of the first Brahman group of the Tamil country, the Pūrvaśikhā group, into 
its historical remnants. We first see them in the Tamil country in the Sangam poetry, 
portrayed in it with their kuṭumi in the likeness of a horse’s mane, composing themselves 
a sizeable number of these poems, no doubt using the Tamil Brāhmī script, created by the 
Jain monks in the Pāṇṭiyan kingdom almost two centuries before. After the Kaḷabhra 
Interregnum, we begin to see the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās in Malabar across the Palghat 
84 
gaps facing the Karur-based Cēra kingdom, certainly the śrauta elites of the community, 
and, as Mahadevan notes, creating from 10th to 16th CE the historical Malayalam script 
from the Vaṭṭeḻuttu and Grantha script, called locally the Āryeḻuttu (2003: 212). 
However, Mahadevan does not explain how the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās come to possess 
the Grantha script, by 10th century CE. True, the Grantha script has already been in 
existence, but in the Tamil country proper, for almost half a millennium, and Mahadevan 
does not explain how it comes to the Nambudiris, in Kerala. It is unlikely that the 
Grantha script arrived in a disembodied form to Malabar and to the Nambudiris; it is 
equally unlikely that the conservative Nambudiris would have accepted a script from the 
outside. Besides, composition in Sanskrit went apace among the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās 
in Malabar before the 10th century CE, showing the presence of a Sanskrit-able script in 
the region. We must note too that almost all intercourse between the Tamil country and 
the emerging Kerala entity had ceased by the 10th century CE, Mahadevan’s date for the 
start of the formation of the Āryeḻuttu In my scheme, the script would have 
accompanied the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās at their departure at the Kaḷabhra Interregnum to 
the Malabar area: indeed, it is the script of *Pūrvaśikhā Mahābhārata, the archetypal 
Southern Recension text that was found in the Nambudiri houses and centers of learning 
in the 20th century: I consider this in fuller detail in Section D iii below. 
D. iii. The Southern Brāhmī Script 
This is the other script into which the Mauryan Brāhmī originally devolves and 
which, like its counterpart, the Tamil Brāhmī script, came to the Tamil-Kerala country, 
giving us three historical South Indian scripts, Kannada and Telugu on the one hand, by 
85 
6th to 7th centuries, and the Grantha script, on the other, a little earlier, by 5th CE. As we 
have already seen, Mahadevan has persuasively suggested that the Tamil Brāhmī script 
was fashioned by the Jain monks ca. 3rd BCE in Madurai Jain monasteries, and this script 
fashions the course of Tamil history for the next half a millennium, functioning as the 
script of the Sangam poetry and transforming later into the Vaṭṭeḻuttu script and serving 
vast areas of the Tamil-Kerala country, all along the east coast of the Tamil country and 
all of today’s Kerala. But what about the origins of its sister script, the Southern Brāhmī 
script, and its development? Who brought it to the south? Why was it not attested till ca. 
5th century CE, with the first Grantha inscription, marking a 600-year gap between the 
Tamil Brāhmī derivatives and Southern Brāhmī derivatives? 
Answers to these and related questions lie in the scenario I have been advancing 
regarding Brahman migration to the south—especially with the Mahābhārata epic. In 
fact, we will see that it is the epic half of the story that completes the validity of the 
argument presented above: the departure of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, ca.150 BCE from 
the antarvedi area of the Ganga-Yamuna doab with a version of the epic resonant with 
the *Śārada text of the Mahābhārata epic and their arrival in the Tamil country in time to 
be attested in the Sangam poetry both as players in the poems and their composers on the 
one hand, and fashioning on the other hand, the *Pūrvaśikhā version of the Southern 
Recension in the half millennium or so after their arrival, by the Kaḷabhra Interregnum. 
The question that will elucidate the entire problem concerns the script in which 
the *Śārada text came to the south with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans. The Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans have displayed strong oral traditions; the famous example of the Nambudiri 
Pūrvaśikhās is only the most conspicuous one. As Raghavan notes in the 1958 survey of 
86 
the state of all-India Vedic recitation, the Śōḻiya Brahmans also possess live family-based 
Vedic oral traditions.119 Something similar to this could be said about the two other 
temple-based Pūrvaśikhā groups as well, the Chidambaram Dīkṣitars and the Tiruchendur 
Mukkāṇi Brahmans, although outside the Vedic tradition properly so called. 
With this in background, we could raise the question if the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans 
brought the *Sārada text as an oral archive. The *Sarada text, as it has been assembled in 
the Poona CE, runs into 75,000 verses—not a formidable number for a person oriented 
and trained in the arts and sciences of the oral tradition to commit and transmit in a 
memorial tradition: we have the example of a Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhā, Ēṛkkara Rāman 
Nambudiri, dictating the entire text of the Kauṣītaki Brāhamaṇa from memory to E.R. 
Sreekrishna Sarma in 1968, rather to a tape recorder commandeered by Professor Sarma 
for the task of the textualization of the text.120 And this would have been only part of his 
oral repertory; as a Kauṣītaki Ṛgvedi, he would know by memory all of the Ṛgveda from 
the saṃhita mode to the jaṭa vikṛti as well as the Āraṇyaka and Upaniṣadic texts of his 
birth Veda, all part of the svādhyāya regimen of his family. The memory load of 75,000 
verses is not the problem per se, inside the context of a fully functioning and flourishing 
system of oral tradition, as we know the Vedic system to have been. 
The problem lies in the fact, on the other hand, that there would have been no 
need nor use for the memorization of the epics, as no rituals demand intact recitation of 
verses from the epic as is the case with Vedic verses—ignoring for the moment the oral 
origins of the epic, the original oral pragmatics that gave rise to the epic at its formative 
stages. We must note that the various mnemonic devices associated with the Vedic oral 
traditions—the padapātha and its vikṛti modifications—possess no epic counterpart. 
87 
Verses from the epic never really possessed a ritual context, demanding the phonetically 
correct recitations, as we know was the case with the Vedic verses. In other words, there 
is no oral infrastructure for the transmission of the epics, comparable to that of the Vedic 
texts. 
Consider for instance the case of the Pallava epigraphy, where a share of the land 
grant is predicated to the livelihood of a reader of the epic (‘vāśippavanukku’)121: we 
know that the epic was not “read” (√vāci [?], to read; not in DED), much less recited to 
an audience. To judge from the well-founded latter day praxis of the craft, a verse or a 
group of verses would be read or declaimed (rather than ‘recited’ with its Vedic 
connotation of proper accentuation and exact phonology) by the discourser to expatiate 
on issues of right and wrong, right conduct at moments of ethical or moral ambiguity, 
with, as we know, a good deal of sophistry and expostulation. A sample of such 
exposition is in fact a regular weekly column in the Hindu newspaper, appearing in the 
back page of the newspaper.122 We should contrast this with the example of the Homeric 
epics and public recitations of portions of the epics in the Pan-Atheniam festival in 
Athens. Plato’s Ion (530B2) makes it clear that the rhapsodes merely recited, if 
performatively, stretches of verses from the Homeric epics on stage in competition or 
contest with other rhapsodes123: no commentarial discourses followed the recitation. In 
the Indian example, we know that the praxis is completely different, the discourser 
reading from a written (printed, today) copy of the epic verse or passage from the epic as 
a take off strategy, as a point of departure, to pass on to his many homilies and casuistries 
on matters related and unrelated to the epic verses. In turn, we must contrast this with the 
tape recorder-like fidelity of recitations of the Vedic verses in Vedic rituals among the 
88 
same people, in the same tradition. In other words, we may rule out oral tradition as a 
means in the transmission of the epic, both in time and space. 
In addition, the parva-based transmission of the Mahābhārata text would have 
made the mastery of the entire epic to a memorial tradition impossible—the parva 
transmission itself being a consequence of the literate tradition, it should be added. One 
of the discoveries made by the Poona editors during the preparation of the Critical 
Edition was that the transmission of the epic was often along individual parvans, rather 
than the entire text of the epic, an inevitable condition with a text of the size of the 
Mahābhārata. It makes no sense to think that just one or two parvans would be mastered 
in oral tradition and transmitted as such. We could add parenthetically that if all parvans 
of the epic are found in a given resource center, then the text tradition of the center in 
question must be generally unimpeachable. This is what we find in the case of both the 
Pūrvaśikhā and Aparaśikhā Brahmans: each of these groups could have assembled a 
complete 24-parvan Southern Recension Mahābhārata text, as indeed they did. We have 
a complete verse-to-verse translation of the Pūrvaśikhā-Malayalam version of the 
Mahābhārata into Malayalam by the prince Kuññikkuṭṭi Tamburān in 1904-07; we have 
P.P.S. Sastri’s Kumbakonam edition of the Aparaśikhā Southern Recension in 1933, 
assembled from the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu version of the Mahābhārata, from the 
Sarasvatī Mahāl Library: P.P.S.Sastri was the director of the library.124 
For all these reasons, we can discount the possibility of an oral archivization and 
transmission of the Mahābhārata epic—both vertically in time from generation to 
generation and horizontally, across geographical space, from northern India to other 
parts. Indirectly, this supports the Hiltebeitel (2001: 20-21) thesis of a committee-based 
89 
redaction of the entire corpus,125 a script driving, perhaps, the redactorial process. It is 
easy to see that the only script that offers itself is the Southern Brāhmī in Mahadevan’s 
chart, providing the conveyance of the *Śārada text to South India with the Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans, the latter group, with strong adherence to the Jaiminīya tradition and thus 
frame narratives, originally perhaps even part of the Hiltebeitel committee. Let us note 
that the sister script, Tamil Brāhmī, has already traveled southward independently with 
the Jain monks, who fashion this script by 3rd BCE to meet the demands of Tamil 
phonology, a point that cannot be overemphasized. That is, in effect, this script, the 
script of the Sangam poetry, cannot carry the full range of the sounds of the Sanskrit 
language and literature, ruling itself out for the transcription of the *Pūrvaśikhā SR 
Mahābhārata, although attested in the Tamil country by 3rd century BCE. The only 
script that possesses at the same time attestation in peninsular India, albeit late in Grantha 
script, by 5th century CE, and the ability to carry the full range of Sanskrit phonetics, is 
the *Southern Brāhmī script. 
Once we accept this, many known and stray facts fall in place. The Pūrvaśikhā 
Brahmans depart the antarvedi area of the Gangā-Yamunā doab, with the *Śārada text in 
the Southern Brāhmī script, ca. 150 BCE. At and after their arrival in the Tamil country, 
they participate in the creation of the Sangam literature in the Tamil-Brāhmī script, 
already in use in the area, having been created earlier by the Jain monks. They also 
create the *Pūrvaśikhā text of the Mahābhārata in the Southern Brāhmī script, over the 
next several centuries. In other words, we must assume a sort of di-graphia,126 equivalent 
to diglossia, but in the realm of scripts, among the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, using the Tamil 
Brāhmī script for writing in Tamil and the Southern Brāhmī script to write in Sanskrit. 90 
The rise of the Southern Recension text is proof positive for this: the text exists as a 
physical object, each of the 18 parvans of the Northern Recension worked over; material 
adapted from khilā (“appendix”) sections to re-fashion the main parts of the epic, as in 
the peroration of Bhīṣma on behalf of Kṛṣṇa in the Sabhāparvan; with several episodes 
transposed, the whole epic becoming more Brahmanical than the already Brahmanical 
Northern Recension and attaining a 24-parvan extent in its final form. It is not enough if 
we imagine the process in the abstract: we must account for the human agencies behind 
the process and the possible scripts that could meet the demands of a Sanskrit phonology. 
It is thus that the Southern Brāhmī script evolves into the Grantha script, over the half- 
millennium or so. The royal epigraphy of the three Tamil kingdoms in the area continues 
in the meanwhile to be in the Tamil-Brāhmī script, a practice already established by the 
Jain monks, with the “unique” adoption of a northern Brāhmī script for the non-Sanskrit, 
Dravidian phonology of Tamil, attested in a total of 70 inscriptions in the Pāṇtiyan 
kingdom, 17 in the Cēra kingdom, 5 in the Toṇṭai region, and 4 in the Cōḷa area, from 3rd 
BCE to 6th CE (Mahadevan 2003: 134). In the meanwhile, the Southern Brāhmī script, 
the script of the Mahābhārata epic, remains with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, becoming the 
Grantha script in time and giving us the *Pūrvaśikhā text by the Kaḷabhra Interregnum. 
The date of the first appearance of the Grantha script in inscription supports this, the early 
6th century CE, a century or so before the Old Kannada and Telugu scripts. Let us keep 
in mind the pakaḷiya attestations, and thus a Pūrvaśikhā presence, in the Tonṭaimanṭalam 
region during the Pallava period. 
In other words, the Southern Brāhmī-Grantha script, say *Grantha script, is a 
paleographic counterpart of our *Pūrvaśikhā SR text. At the Kaḷabhra Interregnum, the 
91 
future Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās take both the *Pūrvaśikhā text of the Southern Recension 
and the *Grantha script to the Malabar area over the Palghat gaps, creating the Āryeḻuttu 
from the Grantha and the resident Vaṭṭeḻuttu scripts from 10th to 16th centuries. Indeed, 
the area of the Āryeḻuttu script shows itself clearly as an intrusive wake in the linguistic 
map of Kerala, formed by the arrival of the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās through the Palghat 
gaps, with Vaṭṭeḻuttu in use in areas both to the north, as Kōleḻuttu, a form of Vaṭṭeḻuttu, 
and Vaṭṭeḻuttu proper in the south, in the historical Travancore-Cochin region (Map IV). 
Both the *Pūrvaśikhā text, now distinctly as the Σ-text, and its Grantha script stay behind 
in the Tamil country, with the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās. They create from the Grantha script of 
the epic and the Vaṭṭeḻuttu script of the Tamil Brāhmī family the extant historical Tamil 
script, the script of the Āḻvār (and Nāyanār) poetry. 
We are now in the Pallava period of Tamil history and the arrival of the 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans, from 4th CE onward. There can be little doubt that the Aparaśikhā 
Brahmans were a literate group, allowing writing, unlike the Pūrvaśikhās, to enter even 
their Śrauta praxises. And the early Pallava epigraphy shows the script to have been the 
“Brāhmī Script of the Southern Class” (Mahalingam: 29-30).127 By the mature Pallava 
period, the Sanskrit parts of the Copper Plate paleography are in the Grantha script and 
Tamil parts, in historical Tamil script, the common script of the region, created from the 
Grantha and Vaṭṭeḻuttu scripts. As with the precedents of the Śrīvaiṣṇavism and the 
Southern Recension Mahābhārata, the Aparaśikhā Brahmans adapt themselves to the 
host traditions, in the matter of the writing systems as well. 
Is there a trace of the Aparaśikhā script that came with them, a counterpart to the 
σ-text in the final paleographical picture of the Tamil country? Sure enough: as William 
92 
Bright notes (1998: 45) “[I]n the eighth century (CE) a competing script came into use 
for Tamil—probably reflecting a northern variety of Brāhmī, but with strong influence 
from the Grantha.” It needs to be scarcely added that the eighth century marks the arrival 
of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans in large numbers, with the rise of grāmadeya of 108 
families, and we have our σ-script. 
D. iv. The Brahmans, the Sanskrit Epics and Paleography 
The famed Laurentianus codex of the plays of Sophocles,128 in the early 
“miniscule” style of writing, six plays and a fragment out of, it is thought, a total of 120 
plays the playwright wrote through his long life in Athens, from 495-406 BCE, is dated 
to the 11th century CE. It was made in a Byzantium scriptorium from an eighth century 
CE archetype, with five extra lines on each page and enough marginal space for the 
scholia, already, it would seem, a set practice in the tradition of manuscript transmission 
of Western classical texts. It was acquired in Byzantium by Giovanni Aurispa, a Sicilian 
manuscript collector and dealer, between 1422 and 1423, and sent in advance of his own 
journey with an additional 238 volumes back to Florence, to Niccolo dé Niccoli, a 
prominent member of the group which surrounded Cossimo dé Medici in Florence. It lay 
in the Medici collections till 1523, traveling then to Rome with the Medici Pope, Clement 
VII, when he built the extant Florence Laurentian library to receive them. Another 
edition of the Sophocles plays appeared in the meanwhile, in 1502, in Venice, also from 
other Byzantium manuscripts, dating from 14th century CE, published by Aldo Munuzio, 
but in ignorance of and thus without consultation with the Laurentian manuscript. The 
93 
Aldine text held sway till the second Juntine edition of 1547, the first Juntine edition 
having been published in 1522 largely based on the Aldine edition of 1502. The second 
Juntine edition of 1547 incorporates the codex Laurentianus of the Sophocles plays for 
the first time into the textual tradition the plays, thereby and thereafter making codex 
Laurentaianus the basis for the editio princeps of the Sophocles textual history. 
I provide this excursus into the textual history of the plays of Sophocles, not, as it 
might seem at first sight, to draw contrast between the histories of transmission of texts 
between east and west, the precision of the latter and the looseness or waywardness of the 
former but rather to show that an equally sagacious narrative of the transmission of texts 
is possible for the family of the Mahāhārata texts and manuscripts, if the right questions 
are posed and rational answers arrived at. Far too often, a regional text is taken for 
granted, given a disembodied existence, as if the epic unearthed itself there like the 
Copper Plate inscriptions, outside the realm of the questions that have governed this 
investigation. Both Brahman groups can be concretely linked to the textual history of the 
Southern Recension of the Mahābhārata epic. Moreover, we see that an adequate 
narrative of its formation can be obtained from the history of the paleography of the two 
major families of scripts of the region, the Sanskrit-able Southern Brāhmī script and the 
Tamil-able Tamil Brāhmī script—in other words, a literate version of texts, pointing to 
the fallacy of the idea of nebulousness, or worse, the absence of “texts”, in the east. The 
Ṛgveda all by itself is a constant and eternal repudiation of this fallacy, remaining an oral 
text for all practical purposes to this day among the Brahmans of this investigation. 
However, even Sukthankar echoes such a sentiment in his persistent invocation of the 
difficulty of the creation of a CE of the Mahābhārata with his reiteration, surely once too 
94 
often, of the sui generis nature of the epic. There is no doubt the epic is sui generis, but it 
is so in the manner of most archaic texts. 
This is the larger context in which I have framed the above argument that brings 
together three items in an algorithmic relationship, the Brahmans, the Sanskrit epics and 
their various scripts, the three irreducible correlates. It is quite true that we cannot 
conjure the Byzantine scriptoriums in the various points of interest in the textual history 
of the Mahābhārata—a point, ca.150 BCE, in the erstwhile realm of the Kuru-Pāñcāla 
chieftains and kings--Witzel’s Brahman kings promoting the Śrauta traditions--of the 
gathering of Hiltebeitel’s Brahman committee and the resulting *Śārada codex; a Sangam 
locale later, ca.100-400 CE, where the *Pūrvaśikhā Mahābhāratha was created; or a 
Nāyaka facility where the Aparaśikhā text took shape. What I have tried to show above 
is that only because some analogues of these facilities existed at these and other such 
relevant geographical points do we have the extant manuscripts of the different text- 
traditions of the Mahābhārata. 
First of all, the analogues to the vellum parchments of the Byzantine scriptoriums. 
I have claimed above that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans left the antarvedi area of the Ganga- 
Yamuna area with the Mahābhārata epic, a version close to the Śārada text. What was 
the epic written on? I believe that we can rule out leather as the physical manuscript: 
*Śārada text was close to 75,000 verses and it is difficult to imagine enough leather for 
this much text. The būrjapatra is a choice for the material, and it appears as an item of 
trade in the Rāmāyaṇa.129 However, its supply, available only in birch forests 7500 feet 
high in the Kashmiri-Himalayan mountains may well be as rare as the Soma of the 
Mujāvat mountains. More likely, the physical manuscript would be the palm leaf linked 
95 
to an ink-quill technology. Once it reaches peninsular India, the palm leaves can readily 
be imagined to take its place, and considering the sheer size of the text, it is even possible 
that the first transcription of the *Śārada codex in būrjapatra or palm leaf into the 
traditional peninsular palm leaves based on an iron stylus technology may well be the 
beginning of the process of the revision of the *Sārada text into what becomes the first 
ornate *Pūrvaśikhā text of the Southern Recension. We must keep in mind that by now, 
as Mahadevan notes,130 the Tamil society has become truly literate and the use of palm 
leaves for writing, pervasive—leading, indeed, as I note above, to the circular shape of 
the Tamil-Brāhmī script as it becomes Vaṭṭeḻuttu. Professional scribes, the equivalent of 
the personnel of the Byzantine scriptoriums, must have been widely available, extant in 
the 1950’s in my memory in Kerala as recorders--directly on palm leaves with iron stylus 
held in a closed right fist--of the horoscopes of new born babies, when pen and paper had 
become de rigueur in our other lives.131 
Second, the script. If we accept that the Mahābhārata tradition is literate, then we 
have to deal with issues relating to a script in which the corpus was copied—in either 
būrjapatra in the north and palm leaf in peninsular India. An alternative, of course, is to 
imagine that the epic was in an oral tradition all the way to the dawn of the CE, as 
Fitzgerald intimated to me,132 close to 100,000 verses—without, however, a plausible 
infrastructure to support or maintain it in oral tradition. As already noted above, an 
institutionalized oral tradition was never part of the transmission of the epic, except 
perhaps at its origins. Things clarify themselves exemplarily once we cross this Rubicon. 
We see that, for the development of the Southern Recension in the physical medium of 
the palm leaf, the only relevant script is the Southern Brāhmī script. Its sister script, the 
96 
Tamil Brāhmī script is already attested in the Tamil country by 3rd century BCE, its 
archetype having left northern India with the Jain monks some considerable time 
before—a century or so, as Mahadevan suggests (159)--for the Jain monks to develop 
from a Sanskrit-based writing system a script appropriate for Tamil phonology. 
However, the epic did not come to the Tamil country with the Jains, but with a group of 
Brahmans, almost two centuries later, by the dawn of the Common Era and the Sangam 
poetry, into an area already widely literate with the Tamil Brāhmī script. This is the 
logic—a Sanskrit text being made from one version to another—that forces us to accept 
the reality of the Southern Brāhmī as the script of the epic, and that it came with the 
Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, the latter being the di-graphic human agency behind both the 
Sangam poems, in their Brahmanical contents and authorships, and the Southern 
Recension text of the Mahābhārata epic. We do not have an alternative explanation in 
the present state of our knowledge. 
Third, the Brahmans: the analogues of Niccolo dé Niccoli and Cossimo dé Medici 
of the Sophocles text history. Both groups of Brahmans, Pūrvaśikhā as well as 
Aparaśikhā, were full equivalents to the Renaissance figures, in the matter of the 
transmission of the texts and literate scholarship. More than this, the really important 
point to note is that the infrastructure that served the transmission of the texts in South 
Asia was analogous, and of a high order. Both groups of Brahmans above brought the 
śrauta traditions of Vedism to the peninsular India, the first group, the Pūrvaśikhās by the 
beginnings of the Common Era and maintaining them still in a live oral tradition, and the 
second, Aparaśikhā Brahmans by the Pallava-Cōḷa periods, an entirely different tradition 
derived from a later corpus of Vedic texts and in a partly literate state. Indeed, this 
97 
demands an infrastructure of far greater complexity than that needed to run the Byzantine 
scriptoriums. First and foremost, it needs a specific tri-Vedic axis of praxis: the hautram 
of a specific school of Ṛgvedic texts, the ādhvaryam likewise of a specific Yajurveda 
tradition and, third, easily the most important of the three, the audgātram of a specific 
Sāmaveda tradition—all institutionalized in the family-based svādhyāya system. 
Migrations of Brahman groups who have sustained a Śrauta tradition could only have 
been well-organized and systematized with the sort of sophisticated infrastructure such as 
the one we are led to imagine for Byzantium or Florence. 
A large part of the infrastructure would be linked naturally to the demands and 
praxis of the Vedic tradition, the mastery of the three ritual Vedas in the first place and 
their immense and baroque viniyoga deployments in the rituals—demanding 16 priests 
for the śrauta ritual. We know that the śrauta ritual demands a rehearsal of some six 
months,133 as observed in its modern day performances. Even if we allow a shorter 
period for preparation and rehearsals from constant and regular practice, it would be 
nearly the occupation of an entire year. In other words, the two Brahman groups in 
question here, Pūrvaśikhā or Aparaśikhā, must be imagined as engaged in śrauta matters 
most of the year, performing the śrauta ritual every year at vernal equinox on their 
centuries-old migrations southward.134 The Assaka Soma ritual of the Suttanipada, 
possibly, is one such example. That they did so is proved by the survival of the śrauta 
Vedism in both groups, each distinct and autonomous. For instance, we know that the 
śrauta tradition with the Vādhūla school of the Yajurveda meeting the praxis of 
ādhvaryam has been extinct among the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās since the beginnings of 
20th century CE 135: it also means that it had survived among them till then, from 5th 
98 
century BCE, at the latest. To consider another example, a śrauta tradition is altogether 
no longer extant among the Tamil-speaking Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās,136 but we know from the 
Karandai Plates that it existed among them till 1029-30 CE, presumably in a live and 
continuous tradition from its origins. 
To throw in the Mahābhārata epic into this infrastructure of transmission of 
systematized knowledge is to ask a small camel--okay, a large one--into the tent, albeit in 
a literate transcript in a generally oral tent. Once we accept the formation of the 
Mahābhārata in its present form and extent, and its canonical status as the fifth Veda, we 
cannot separate it from the Brahman groups of the type we encounter above. We must 
recall here that the founding myth of the Mahābhārata is a śrauta ritual, the Janamejaya 
Sarpa Sattra. This represents a Brahman possession of the epic, perhaps not wholly 
disconnected from the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans of the above account in that Vyāsa, the 
master composer of the epic and a Parāśara Brahman, appears as part of the sadasya of 
the Śrauta ritual, an office unique to the Kauṣītaki hautram of the Pūrvaśikhā Śrauta axis 
and second, the hyper-developed frame narratives among the Jaiminīya groups, also part 
of the Pūrvaśikhā matrix: whether it was also at the same time a Bhṛgu usurpation of the 
epic is, I believe, not a wholly closed question.137 Brahman groups with the sort of 
learning infrastructure, or learning quotient, as above, would also keep the text in 
transmission, but as a literate transcript in an otherwise still predominantly oral culture. 
A literate artifact means a script, and we see that appropriate and relevant paleography is 
attested in both Brahman groups. 
Lastly, we should resist the ease of imagination a disembodied regional version 
found in situ in isolated points of South Asia affords us, as in an abstract statement like 
99 
“The Mahābhārata epic is found in its shortest Southern Recension in Kerala.” To 
subject such a statement to an Occam razor analysis, an analysis of its irreducible 
physical, areal correlates—the script, the physical form of the manuscript, the extent of 
the epic itself, the human agencies behind the texts—in terms, further, of their final 
filiations, is to arrive at the conclusions reached above: that the Mahābhārata, 
substantially the Śarada codex text of the CE, or the *Sarada text in my scheme, left the 
antarvedi area of northern South Asia ca.150 BCE with the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans in a 
*Southern Brāhmī script in possibly the būrjapatra manuscript or the palm leaf 
manuscript of northern India, both using an ink-quill technology of writing;138 they 
created the *Pūrvaśikhā text in the Tamil-Kerala country from this in the half millennium 
after arrival, the recensional change from the *Sarada to *Pūrvaśikha probably taking 
place in the process of transcription from the northern manuscripts to the palm leaf 
manuscript of the South with the stylus technology, the original *Southern Brāhmī script 
becoming gradually the Grantha script in the process; a *Pūrvaśikhā text moves to the 
present territory of Malabar in Kerala at the Kaḷabhra Interregnum and comes to Poona 
for collation purposes toward the creation of the Poona CE; a *Pūrvaśikhā text remains in 
the Tamil country as the Σ-text to host Sukthankar’s σ-text, that is, playing host to the 
Aparaśikhā immigrants and to their Northern Recension text, creating eventually the 
Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu version of the Southern Recension. 
1Sukthankar, V.S., et al., eds. 1933-70. Mahābhārata: Critical Edition. 24 volumes with Harivaṃśa. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Almost every editor of the Critical Edition comments on the general differences between the two recensions; the sustained exposition of these is to be found in V.S.Sukthankar’s Prolegomena, i-cx, in his edition of the Ādiparvan (1933). 
2The picture as it relates to the Critical Edition of the sister epic, the Rāmāyaṇa is altogether a different matter for want of a Sukthankar-like figure in the editorial team. The Rāmāyaṇa project began in 1952, when a substantial part of the CE of the Mahābhārata was already available in published form. That is, the “anomalous” status of the Malayalam version of the Mahābhārata was already well established in 100 
Sukthankar’s Prolegomena (1933) to the Ādiparvan and in the introductions by the other editors of the Mahābhārata CE. It would seem that the Baroda Editors of the Rām. would have shown special interest in the Malayalam version of the Rām., especially after their decision to settle on its Southern Recension for their primary text, (itself a problematic decision), but such does not seem to have been the case. There is no discussion , nor reference, to the problem in G. H. Bhatt’s edition of the Bālakāṇḍa (1960), the first volume of the CE; the other editors Divanji, Āraṇyakakāṇḍa (1963); Mankad, Kiṣkindakāṇḍa (1965); Jhala, Sundarakāṇḍa (1966) seem to have followed the example of Bhatt. It is left to P. L. Vaidya, already with editorial experience in the Mahābhārata project (having edited the Karṇa-, Bhīṣma-, Mokṣa-parvans and all of Harivamśa) to raise the question, when he joins the Ram. project to edit the Ayodhyakāṇḍa (1962) and Yuddhakāṇḍa (1971): he raises the issue of “special alignments” between some Malayalam versions and the Northern Recension Ram. texts. Subsequent to this there seems to have been some effort made to procure more Malayalam manuscripts under the direction of U. P. Shah, the second and last Chief Editor of the Ram. project. Several more Malayalam manuscripts are actually collected, confirming Vaidya’s discovery of close alignments between some Malayalam mss. and some NR texts. For good measure, as if in some penitence for the earlier oversight, Shah reproduces in the last volume of the Ram. CE no less than ten facsimile pictures of the new Malayalam manuscripts freshly collected from various Nambudiri homes in Kerala. But it was too late, as Shah himself acknowledges, astonishingly, in what amounts to a retraction of the entire Ram. CE in a note well after the completion of the entire Ram. project (1980:102): “So far as the Ramāyaṇa Critical Edition is concerned, I believe that further search of M[alayalam] version MSS, representing earlier tradition, and agreeing with N[orthern] for the different kāṇḍas would be necessary and fruitful. We could not do this as we came to know of this at a very late stage, i.e., while editing the Uttarakāṇḍa.” Shah further notes that M4, the Malayalam manuscript used for the Bālakāṇḍa and Ayodhyakāṇḍa “could have suggested this possibility” (102)--rather disingenuously, as it had been done by Vaidya while using the M4 ms. in his introduction to the Ayodhyakāṇḍa. See Pollock, “The Rāmāyaṇa text and the critical edition.” In Princeton Ramāyaṇa, Volume I: 82-93. 
3A sea-borne arrival of the epic along the western sea with the Nambudiri Brahmans is to be rejected for several reasons. I believe that the legend of a sea-borne arrival of the Nambudiris on the Malabar coast is itself not viable: it results from confusing two Brahman groups of Kerala with one another; the Sāgara or Samudra Nambudiris and the Nambudiris properly so called, with a śrauta tradition, profiled in Thurston (1909) and Iyer (1912). The former group does seem to have arrived by sea well into the middle ages, as the name suggests, but just from the Tulu coast, probably bringing with it the Paraśurāma myth from the Maharashtra-Goa coast. An all-Baudhāyana group and known in Kerala as “pōṟṟis” in yester-years, these Brahmans do not have an extant śrauta praxis. On the other hand, as we will see below, there is strong epigraphic evidence for the presence of the second group, the Pūrvaśikhā Nambudiris with Śrauta traditions in the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam and Cōḷa areas of the Tamil country as late as the 9th century CE. We will also see that the Nambudiri Brahmans share many rare Veda śākhās with their fellow Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, found historically in Tamil Nadu. It is easier to imagine, as is argued here, that the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās moved to the Malabar area of Kerala through the Palghat gaps from the Tamil country than that the Tamil Pūrvaśikhās moved from Kerala to the Tamil country, as the scenario of the sea-born arrival for Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans would have us imagine. Besides there is something overdetermined in the thesis that the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās set sail from the Gujarat coast and traveled south till they arrived in Kerala (Veluthath 1978). I develop in the body of my paper the thesis that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans as a whole group, were the first group of Brahmans to bring Vedism to South India, and that they formed in the first few centuries of the Common Era a single group, fragmenting into their historical groups and identities after the Kaḷabhra Interregnum, ca. 4th to 7th centuries. Thus the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās can be dated to their Kerala home only from the Sangam-Kaḷabhra period South Indian history. 
4Thennilapuram P. Mahadevan. The Arrival of Vedism in the Tamil-Kerala country: the Pūrvaśikhā and Aparaśikhā Brahmans. 
5It is in Thurston (1909 [I]:393; [V]; 152-241) that we see this distinction formally acknowledged and discoursed, although distinctly from an Aparaśikhā perspective: for instance, we see that the Thurston informants mention the pūrvaśikhā as worthy of note. All the Thurston ‘native informants’ see the 
101 
pūrvaśikhā mode as exceptional. K. Rangachari is listed in title page as Thurston’s assistant, and he was almost certainly the compiler of the information on the Brahmans of the Tamil and Telugu country. One M.N.Subramania Aiyar (154) is mentioned as the informant for the Nambudiri section for the Thurston volumes. L.K.Anantha Krishna Iyer ([II] 1912: 171-188) is strong on the Nambudiris. All these are, anecdotally, Aparaśikhā Brahmans, in particular from the “vaṭama” and “bṛhatcaraṇam” sections of the Aparaśikhā group, what I characterize (see below; note 6) as the Burton Stein Brahmans, the Brahmans of the Tamil country (including the vaṭakalai section of the Śrī Vaiṣṇava Brahmans) to take to Western education earliest, beginning indeed their lives earlier in the Tamil country under the Pallava-Cōḻa patronage from ca. 5th century CE onward. The distinction between the two types of kuṭumis has been further elaborated by Raghavan (1958); Staal (1960); Parpola (1973; 1984). 
6This is the Peruntēvanār of the invocatory verses to the Sangam anthologies. Peruntēvanār addresses different deities, one each for an anthology, without the sectarian affiliation of the Bhakti period to a single god-head, plausibly thus datable to the period after the Sangam age and before the Bhakti period, 5th to 6th centuries CE. The three invocatory deities are Murukan (Kuṛuntokai); Viṣṇu-Kṛṣṇa (Naṟṟinai); Śiva (Ainkurunūṛu; Neṭuntokai, Puṛanānūṛu). J. R. Marr (1985: 71) shows convincingly that these verses are decidedly post-Sangam in that their “terms of praise” are similar to those in Tēvāram and NDP, and thus cannot be dated before 7th century CE. They must date thus to the period between the Sangam period and before the Bhakti poetry and its sectarian celebrations of their respective gods. 
7The route is of great interest in contemporary archeology: “Perhaps the most interesting region for an examination of issues related to cultural transformation is the stretch extending from the Palghat gap and Coimbatore to the Kaveri delta. One site especially significant... is ... Kudumanal on the northern bank of the river Noyyal, a tributary of the Kaveri. The site saddles the ancient route from the Palghat gap eastward from Karur and Uraiyūr along the Kaveri and dates from the late Megalithic to Early Historical periods (3rd BCE to 3rd CE.)” (Ray 2006: 118). 
8Stein argues (1966: 236) that throughout the Pallava area of Toṇṭaimanṭalam, “large-scale tank-irrigation projects were carried out to convert the central Tamil plain from a region of forest and hazardous dry crop agriculture to a reliable wet cultivation capable of supporting dense population.” Although Stein’s over- emphases on the local autonomy of the nāṭu system, with the Cōḷa state machinery playing no role in its administration, has been questioned and corrected by Karashima (1984:xxv-xxvi) and on the role played by the Brahmans by Champakalakshmi (2001: 60), his thesis that the Cōḷa state undergoes a fundamental transformation by large scale arrival of Brahmans, a process already begun in the Pallava period, remains a historiographical breakthrough for South Indian history. The immigrant Aparaśikhā Brahmans, first attested in the Pallava land grant deeds, form the backbone of this population, the Cōḷas, succeeding the Pallavas and continuing their grāmadeya system seamlessly—the entire process developing a “southern variant of the Āryan civilization,” and “a large population of peasants lent their support to the maintenance of this culture” (237). Stein’s Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India (1980) is a fuller treatment of this thesis that the Coromandal Brahmadeya village was a keystone of Coromandal culture: “[D]uring the Chola age, we are afforded the first view...of how wealthy and powerful peasants, Brahmans, great chiefs and kings...shaped a highly variegated landscape to their distinctive purposes. And the arrangements established... during the the Chola period persisted into the modern age notwithstanding political, social and cultural developments which transformed many crucial aspects of South Indian life” (4). It is these Aparaśikhā Brahmans “who had come from North India in the medieval times...went after the English educations (sic) in a big way. These Brahmans had been given special villages or brahmadeyas by the medieval landlords and kings, and they had continued with the study of Sanskrit texts, but they had weak economic roots in South India because they preferred not to do priestly work in the temples and did not work in the land. With their English educations (sic), these Brahmans quickly got the best positions in the civil service and educational institutions, but their success led to resentment on the part of others in South Indian society” (Younger, 1994: 148). Paul Younger is drawing a contrast between the Aparaśikhā Brahmans and one section of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans of my study, the Chidambaram Dīkṣitars. 
102 
9Obviously we do not know what this script was, my asterisks indicating this. From Iravatam Mahadevan (2003), we know that two families of Brāhmī scripts came to the peninsular region; see below Section D for full details and discussion. The first of these seems to have been the prototype of the Tamil Brāhmī script, developed in the Tamil country by the Jains to meet the needs of Tamil phonology, by 250 BCE, with almost a hundred years or so presence there to develop the script to meet the Dravidian phonology. We have no information in Mahadevan about who brought the second Brāhmī script to the peninsular region, giving rise to the Telugu-Kannada scripts on the one hand and the Grantha script, on the other hand, and all meeting the needs of Sanskrit phonology. I raise the question in the text that if the Jains brought a script to South India, the Brahmans could have, too. Thus I would predicate my argument here to the thesis that that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans were literate when they left the Vedic realm, naturally in a script able to meet the Sanskrit phonology, and that the Sanskrit epics were conveyed in this script to the south, most likely in palm leaf manuscripts. 
10Birchbark was in use in the northwest, palm leaf in the north of India (Witzel 2008). We do not know where exactly the first textualization of the epic took place, (possibly in the western Pāñcāla land). The physical manuscript may have been one of the two. 
11Based on the prosodic study of the meters of the verses that appear in the Gṛhyasūtras, Oldenberg (1892: xiv) shows that these verses, mostly in anuṣṭhubh meters, dating from the late Vedic period, are “later than the time of the oldest Vedic poetry, and coincides rather with the transition period in the development of the Anuṣṭhubh metre, a period which lies between the old Vedic and the later Buddhistic and epic form.” 
12The verse in KGS is a pitṛ-tarpaṇa oblation: sumantujaiminīyavaiśampāyana pailasūtrabhāṣyamahābhāratadharmācāryaāstrupyantu. The epic seems to appear here along with Sūtras and Bhāṣhyas, all three linked to Sumantu, Jaimini, Vaiśampāyana, and Paila. It is not clear why Śuka is missing in the list. It is not clear who the “dharmācārya” is? I have used the Malayalam Kauṣītaki caḍaṅgu. Kunnamkulam: Panjangam Press, 2001: 118. In Oldenberg’s (1886:122) translation of the ŚGS (SBE 29), Mahābhārata is missing, but in his translation (1886:220) of the ĀGS, Bhārata appears in addition to the Mahābhārata. 13Witzel (2005:66): “If the Śuṅga, as Brahmans, took an active interest in the traditional Kuru tales and therefore actually ordered some (’committee’ of) Brahmins to come up with a unified, pro-western and anti-eastern MBh, it would not surprise us to see such Brahmanical patterns in the text.” Kulke and Rothermund (1986: 71) note that the Śuṅgas were not exactly anti-Buddhist. Of Puṣyamitra’s Vedism, there is little doubt, even the puruṣamedha is attributed to him (Kulke-Rothermund: 71).. 
14J. F Staal (1987:371): “The most remarkable feature of the Indian scripts is not their shapes but their scientific arrangement which is basically the same in all the many forms with which we are familiar. Instead of the haphazard ABC’s of the West, the Indian scripts begin with a series of vowels—basically a, e, i , o, u, ai, au—followed by the consistently ordered consonants, beginning with ka, kha, ga, gha, nga etc.” In other words, the phonological analysis of the language preceded the syllabic notations in the Indian example. The significance of this is entirely lost on Western scholars who do not believe that an oral tradition engineered the transmission of large texts in a tape-recording-like fidelity. Goody (1985) is the prime mover of this literacist (mis-)understanding of the workings of the oral tradition, and although refuted and corrected more than once (Staal [1986; 1989], Falk [1988]) but it has continuing vocal proponents in the likes of Rosalind Thomas (1992) and Barry Powell (2002). 
15The Foreword is oddly situated in the CE Ādiparvan, with separate numeration (i-viii) after the lengthy Prolegomena (i-cix) and is easy to miss. It purports to be “cursory remarks “to guide the reader through the labyrinth of the very complicated apparatus criticus. 
16 Belvalkar (1947: lxiv): “[T]he urge for variation which is one of the dominant factors resulting in what we now designate as the Southern Recension, was already in operation in the North some ten centuries ago.” I should add here that the only other scholar who really came to grips with this problem was P.L. 
103 
Vaidya, with a breadth of exposure to the manuscripts of the epic equalling that of Sukthankar and Belvalkar. See note 2 above. 
17We see this best with the African oral epics, and it is very probable that such an inflation probably took place with the Homeric epics as well, with the Parry-Lord systematics of oral poetry suggesting intuitively that an oral song conceived in these systematics and transmitted orally from generation to generation would grow in length over time. For example, there is persuasive evidence that the Malian epic, Sundiata, began its career as a lay in the life-time of its hero of the same name and has remained in oral tradition till mid- 20th century, inflating from the 12th century CE, Sundiata’s times in Mali and incorporating into the body of the song many features anachronistic with respect to the original first song. It would be safe to say the Mahābhārata was in such a phase only in its formative stages, during the “Vyāsa’s Bhārata” phase in Sukthankar’s master chart of recensions and version of the epic. Its further local inflation was more likely along the lines and modes suggested by Sukthankar (1933). Oral dynamics in the text as we have it may be entirely ruled out; see Hiltebeitel (2005). 
18Hiltebeitel (2006:227-253) focuses on the Nārāyaṇīya unit of the epic, and its recent study by the German Nārāyaṇīya Studien group (Schreiner 1997a; Oberlies 1998; and Gruendahl 2002.) Calling for a “full study” of the M-manuscripts—that is, what I have called the *Pūrvaśikhā SR Mbh—Hiltebeitel (252) shows that the M-manuscript redactors were “concerned to make the epic as comprehensible as possible for a new and linguistically different milieu.” 
19One plausible chain of events may be, considering the consensus of a 300 CE for the Harivamśa section, that the *Sārada text first arrives at the peninsula plausibly with the Pūrvaśikhās by the Sangam period; the Harivamśa follows it to the peninsula after a gap of two or three centuries, by late Sangam period inspiring an entire revision of the *Śārada text, the first SR version. This would also explain the prominence of the Harivamśa-based Kraiṣṇaism in the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism; see below. 
20“Kapardin/kapardī” is one of the para-Munda words in Witzel (1999: 7). It is accepted that it refers to a “hair knot”; Kuiper (1955) qted. in Witzel (1999:7). We do not know yet how a para-Munda word comes to describe such a striking Indo-Aryan trope. 
21 Gerhard Ehlers (gerhard.ehlers@sbb.spk-berlin.de) to "Mi. Witzel" <witzel@fas.harvard.edu> Subject: Re: EJVS 10-1a. Wed, 24 Sep 2003 11:38:50 +0200 
22 See Frits Staal, The Nambudiri Veda Recitation (1960) for information on the Pūrvaśikhā Veda affiliations. This has been supplemented by my two field trips, 2000 and 2004. For instance, the occurrence of the Kauṣītaki Sūtra among the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās (found in Parali village, west of Palghat with Tamil Nadu adjuncts in Ālangudi agraharam in Tanjavur area) came to light in my 2000 field trip, a trip I undertook, if I may add, in part at Michael Witzel’s (1999) Mao-like “back to villages” call in the Indology list; cf. “Vaidics and Vedic religion” Indology@Listserv.LIV.AC.UK, Thu, 13 May 1999: “Work needs to be done on the last remnants of these [kaṭha (Kashmir), Caraka (Maharastra), Vāḍhūla (Kerala), Āgniveśya (Tanjore area), Vārāha (border of Maharashtra/Gujarat), Kapisthala-Kaṭha ([may be] in Gujarat)]. Why not on your next trip to India? They may be just next door, outside of Nagpur, Tanjore or Ahmedabad. Not to forget some of the reciters who may have settled in Benares....” 
23 Kunjunni Raja, “Introduction” (1995 [VIII]:710) to O.M.C. Narayanan Nambudirippad, 1966-85. Ṛgvēdam: Bhāṣābhāṣyam. 8 Vols. 
24 The Malayalam title for the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhā’s Āśvalāyana-Bahuvṛca Gṛhya Sūtra text is Pakaḻiya Caḍaṅgu. Ed. and collected by Kāṇippayyūr Sankaran Nambudirippad (Kunnamkulam: Pañjāṅgam Press, [1986] 2001). Paviḻiya [pavaḻiya, pakaḻiya] is authoritatively explicated by K.V. Subramania Ayyar ([Epigraphia Indica XXI]: 223). He quotes from his earlier article in South- Indian Inscriptions (n.d.VI: 312): “One of the epigraphs of Uttaramallur belonging to the reign of the Cōḷa King Rajendra Cōḷa I (A.D. 1031-1045) registers a gift of land as paviḻiya-kiḍaippuṛam and stipulates that the men who enjoyed the 
104 
income from it should live in the village and teach the Veda.” He adds in note 3 (223):”kiḍai [sic for kiṭai] in Tamil means teacher and paviḻiya, a term that is not explained in dictionaries is connected phonetically with bahuvṛca . As such provision must be made for teaching the Ṛgveda.” It is almost certain that its extant use in the Tamil middle ages was among the Śōḷiya Pūrvśikhās, the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās having already left the Tamil country for the Malabar region through the Palghat gaps. Oldenberg (1886: 6-7) notes the link between Śambavya and the Kauṣītaki tradition; he uses a Grantha ms. to reconstruct the “correct text of the Śānkhāyana-Gṛhya” bearing the title Kauṣītaka-Gṛhya at the end of each chapter, with a metrical commentary following the text, declaring the link between Śambavya and Kauṣītaki in the opening verse: “Having bowed to the most excellent author of Sūtras, to Śambavya, the Ācārya belonging to the Kauṣītaka school, I shall compose a short commentary on his Gṛhya, which has been forgotten by many” (Oldenberg’s translation). Gonda, Ritual Sūtras (1977: 606-607) expatiates further on the link between the J[Ś]āmbviya Sūtra and Kauśitaki Sutra: “A southern text, designated at the end of the single chapters as Kauṣītaka-Gṛhya and therefore professing to follow the same ṛgvedic tradition, is in a metrical commentary attributed to Śāmbavya. This work—which contains nothing of the last two chapters and only parts of the rites described in ŚGS. III and IV—differs in certain details from Śānkhāyana and includes inter alia the piercing of the lobes of a child’a ear (karṇavedha) (1, 20-1-8) which is wanting in the other gṛhyasūtras of the Ṛgveda and (in Chapter V) rites concerning the pretas (the departed spirits for whom the obsequial rites have not been performed)” (Parenthesis in the original). It is significant that Gonda notes that it is a “southern text”. Most likely, it belongs to the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās. This needs further investigation. 
25 See Frits Staal (1983), Agni. 2 Volumes. 
26 See C.V. Somayajippad, M. Itti Ravi Nambudiri, and Erkkara Raman Nambudiri (1983), “Recent Nambudiri performances of Agniṣṭoma and Agnicayana” in Agni II: 252-255. Eighty families are listed, from 1837 to 1965, with hautram being that of the Kauṣītaki tradition in all. This has been supplemented in Namboothiri.com website, “Recent Namboothiri Performances of Agniṣṭoma and Agnicayana.” The total dominance of the Kauṣītaki tradition in the extant Pūrvaśikhā Śrautism resembles that of the Āpastaṃba tradition in the extant Aparaśikhā Śrautism (see below), although unlike the Āpastaṃba adherents, the Kauṣītakis constitute a distinct minority among the Pūrvaśikhā Ṛgvedis. 
27At a draft stage of this paper, Michael Witzel (2008) raised a question if this assertion was true. I corresponded with Vinod Bhattatirippad, the convenor of the Namboothiri.com and a person with easy access to Nambudiri śrauta experts at all levels, on the question and am able to report here that no Śrauta praxis aligning these Vedic canons is extant even anecdotally or in memory and nor does it seem to have ever existed. Interestingly in Witzel’s (1987; 1989) localization scheme, the Vādhūla home is in the farthest east, on the Gangā, not far from the home of the Kauṣītaki Ṛgveda: it is possible that the special alignment between the Kauṣītaki and Baudhāyana traditions—the BŚS stipulating a Kauṣītaki sadasya— perhaps excluded a tie up with the Vādhūla tradition. It must be noted too that in the recent past, the Kauṣītaki Ṛgvedis routinely mastered the Baudhāyana ādhvaryam (over and above their own hautram), showing that Kauṣītaki and Vādhūla traditions never really aligned in śrauta praxis in the first place in their original homes. 
28“Sadasya” occurs thrice in the Ādiparvan (48.5-10) in the context of the Snake Sacrifice, first to mark in general the king’s sadasya. i.e., assembled guests; second referring specifically to Vyāsa, after enumerating the four chief śrauta priests (hotar, udgātar, brahman, adhvaryu), and third, as in first, signifying the collective audience at the ritual, first Vyāsa’s sons and pupils, followed by an honor roll call that lists Uddālaka, Śamanṭhaka, Śvetaketu, Pañcama, Asita Devala, Nārada, Parvata, Ātreya, Kuṇḍajaṭhara, , Kuṭighaṭa, Vātsya, the old Śrutaśravas, Kahoḍa, Devaśarman, Maudgalya, Śamasaubhara. van Buitenan (1973: 445) glosses the term as “cocelebrants” 
29Ērkkara Raman Nambudiri provides an instance of it. He was the Sadasya priest of the 1975 Agnicayana, studied by Frits Staal, and is generally acknowledged to be the foremost Nambudiri Srauti of the 20th century; see Mahadevan and Staal (2005: 377). See note 26 below. 
105 
30See now Witzel 2005:65; note 153: “The first elaborate frame story, with several hierarchical levels, additionally distinguished by narrative tenses, is found in JB 3.120-128 (italics in the original). 
31Parpola notes further that the migration of the Jaiminīyas to South India was somehow “intimately related to the composition of the Mahābhārata.” (1984: 463). The Pūrvaśikhā link to the epic may also be seen in the name Śukapuram, the most active Śrauta village of the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, derived from Śuka (Parpola 1984: 463), one of the five redactors of the epic under Vyāsa. 
32For a concise discussion of the term siṣṭa in Patañjali, see Cardona (1990); see See Madhav Deshpande (1993) for the evolution of the idea of the śiṣṭa Brahmans. 
33Apte (1958: 1177): “ [B]y birth he is known as a brāhmaṇa; on account of sacraments he is called twice- born; through knowledge he becomes vipra; on account of all three he is called śrotriya.” 
34Friar Tuck is P.T. Srinivasa Iyengar’s (1928) choice of figures, as quoted in K.A.N. Sastri (1976: 72-73), but a mythology centering around Agastya as the figure bringing Brahmans southward is commonplace in South Indian historiography. Paradoxically, my on-going study of the gotra distribution among South Indian Brahmans shows that the Agastya gotra is a rare occurrence, one in a thousand, in their gotra samples. 
35 This is especially the case with the audgatram cadre as it is the royal road to the śrauta phase of the Soma ritual. The priestly axis between the ādhvaryam and hautram axis seems to have been looser, historically. We have the kāṭhaka-bahuvṛcas of Kashmir, (Renou 1950: 215; n. 1), Yajurvedis (of the Kāṭhaka school) by lineage and svādhyāya, but acquiring the needed proficiency in the praxis of the hautram to function as its personnel--the hota, maitrāvaruṇa, acchāvāka, grāvastut--in the ritual. Kashikar and Parpola (1983 [II]: 249) note that in early 20th century, when the traditional Baudhāyana and Āpastamba ādhvaryams were not available in Poona, an Āśvalāyana sacrificer chose a Satyāṣāḍha school of ādhvaryam causing a “stir among the priests for sometime”. Deshpande (2007) reports a similar case from the 19th century Maharashtra of the Vājanaseyi (-Mādhyandina) Yajurvedis mastering the necessary Āśvalāyana-hautram, even staking a claim to the practice in view of the lucrative fees of a śrauta ritual. We see an opposite example among the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, the Kauṣītaki-Ṛgvedis appropriating the praxis of the Baudhāyana-ādhvaryam for a śrauta ritual. However, on the other hand, it would seem that the praxis of the audgatram had become specialized altogether, with the adherence becoming family-specific from early times. No cross-Vedic training is evident with the Sāmavedis: whereas Ṛgvedis (the Nambudiri Kauṣītakis) acquire the necessary ādhvaryam expertise to function as adhvaryus in śrauta rituals in Kerala and Yajurvedis (the Kāṭhakas of Kashmir) acquire enough bahuvṛca (Āśvalāyana) hautram to meet the demands of hautram praxis of the śrauta ritual, the Sāmavedis are an independent śrauta cohort. Indeed the Sāmavedis rehearse on their own during the preparation for a śrauta ritual (Staal [I] 1983: 175-183). Thus the Jaiminiya-audgatram families of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans must have constituted an independent cohort of the migration. It is scarcely possible that they showed up sometime later in a Pūrvaśikhā settlement and picked up with the parent body all over again. As we will see below, such a link-up does not take place even when adjacent to one another physically. 
36Schwatzberg Atlas (1992:15) shows the Magadhan hegemony to be total all the way from 76th parallel to the 88th, with the Matsysas, Pāñcālas and Kurus forming an arc on its western borders. This would cover the entire present-day states of Uttar Prdesh and Bihar. 
37Parpola adds, “Dislike of Māgadhas is ...common to most Vedic texts from the AS [AV]....Prof Aalto has suggested [to] me, this contempt of the Māghadans in the Veda may have contributed to the growth of Buddhism there” (1968: 30. n.1). 
38 As is well known, Brahmans are a secular community today and perhaps do not accord to this ideal. However, Brahmans still linked to a Śrauta tradition and its svādhyāya institutions generally accord to this 
106 
picture, especially, as literature and fieldwork show, the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās. See Staal (1961; 1983 [I]: 167-189). 
39Witzel (1987: 381): “As often, it is early Buddhist texts which provide more detailed and very useful information [on Brahmans]. The Pali texts, which have been composed only shortly after the end of the late Vedic period, frequently describe in lively and graphic detail what is only alluded to in the Vedic texts, which were, after all, composed by Brahmins for Brahmins...” (My parenthesis). 
40I have used the Dines Anderson-Helmer Smith text (1913) of the Sutta-Nipāta and the K.R.Norman (1995) translation. 
41The dating of the Buddhist canonical texts is problematic. It is generally accepted that an oral tradition worked initially behind the recording and transmission of the Buddhist canonical texts (Gombrich 1988: 29). The “four nikāyas and the early verse collections” are “transmitted as instructions of the Buddha himself” (Schmitthausen 1990:1). However, “in view of the discrepancies between the versions of the different schools as well as other reasons, modern scholars will hardly assert that all (emphasis in the original) materials are literal (emphasis in original) transmissions of Buddha’s sermons” (Schmitthausen 1990: 1). “The inconsistencies in the earliest materials show/imply (sic) a chronological development of the teachings: this development may well have taken place within Buddha’s own life time and preaching career” (Gombrich 1990:5). Bailey and Mabbit (2003:1) note that “the Pali Canon took shape between 5th to 3rd centuries (BCE) and to another 200 years.” The revision of Buddha’s date, now accepted ca. 400 BCE, after Bechert (See Cousins [The dating of the historical Buddha: a review article,” JRAS Series 3,6.1] 1996:57-63), makes the Assaka śrauta scenario even more probable. 
42The phrase is of course Geertz’s (1986: 377-78). 
43S. Palaniappan (2008) has raised questions if this DEDR derivation is acceptable, as the word koṭi also refers to a laundry cord from which clothes are hung for drying. However, as I argue in the text, the DEDR etymology is fairly persuasive that the item referred to, in our example, the fronted tuft, is on the top of the head, as for that of the peacock. The poet uses the horse, rather than the peacock, in his simile to suggest the “streaming” aspect of the hair during flight or gallop. 
44Hart (1999:370, extensive entry: s.v. “hair”) thinks it necessary to provide a subject category under “hair”. Lehman and Malten, A Word Index for Cankam Literature (1993: 159) has 31 entries for kuṭumi in its different forms, spread through virtually the entire Sangam canon. 
45Palaniappan (2008) raises this point. N.Subrahmanian is inclined in both directions in his different publications:. In ([1972] 1978: 333) “The Brahman lad wore a tuft in a knot which resembles a horse’s tail done into a knot;” in (1989: 16) “the Brahmin youth wore his tuft and it resembled the knot of hair on horse’s head.” 
46Varier and Gurukkal (1991) and Narayanan Kutti (2003), both in Malayalam, are welcome additions in this regard. 
47Personal Communication. Sri Narayana Sōmayāji, Ṛgveda adhyāpaka, Rajaveda Pāṭaśāla, Kumbakonam. July 2005. The most popular and frequently performed vikṛti-śrauta ritual in the Tanjavur-Kumbakonam area is the Vājapeya, perhaps the backbone of the Aparaśikhā Śrautism. 
48See his Śrautkaramavivekam (1983). There is universal agreement about his pre-eminence as the śrauta ritualist of the 20th century. See Mahadevan and Staal (2005: 377). 
49See Younger (1994: 120. n. 21.) In a fuller study of the emergence of Chidambaram as a “sacred dynastic center,” Hall (2001) notes Kulōttuṅga (1070-1118 CE) as instrumental in the emergence of the Naṭarāja temple of Chidambaram as the sacred center of the Cōḷa polity, and thus naturally the Pūrvaśikhā Dīkṣitars 
107 
as the ritual arbiters of the king’s legitimacy, the reciprocity between the monarch and the Dīkṣitars beginning with Vijayālaya Cōḷa in the second half of the ninth century when the Dīkṣitars “ invest him with the diadem and thus confer on him the royal status in recognition of his extensive conquests” (88). Was there a śrauta component to this ritual as with the Rājasūya? We do not know. Perhaps the first question we should raise is about the Dīkṣitar’s śrautism. The audgatram necessary to sustain a śrauta tradition is not extant among them, as a Sāmaveda tradition is not attested among the Chidambaram Dīkṣitars: they are a bi-Vedic group, only the Āśvalāyana Ṛgveda and the Baudhāyana Yajurveda, having survived among them: Ṛgveda-Āśvalāyana makes up ca, 20% of the group, with the rest made up of the Baudhāyana Yajurvedis. In this they resemble the other solely temple-based Pūrvaśikhā group, the Mukkāṇi- Tirucutantiram Brahmans of the Trruchendur temple on the eastern coast in the Pāṇṭiya realm: neither group possesses a Sāmaveda adjunct, suggesting a lapse or absence of the śrauta tradition. The ritually hyper-active Kauṣītaki Ṛgveda tradition is absent in both of these Pūrvaśikhā groups. Thus it would seem that the Nambudiri and the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās formed a closer group—they are both tri-vedis and they share several signature Pūrvaśikhā Veda śākhās. It is of interest too that when the Śōḷiya Pūrvaśikhās are found linked to temple liturgies, as for instance at Avataiyār Koil or Tiruvaṇakkāvu, the liturgy is Vedic, the Āgniveśya Gṛhya Sūtra with the first and the Baudhāyana Gṛhya Sūtra with the second. Neither the Dīkṣitars nor the Tirucutantirars employ Vedic liturgies in their respective temples. It is also not clear if the mastery of the Ṛgveda or the Taittirīya Saṃhita was extant among them, but is avidly pursued today by both, as I found in fieldwork. 
50The Sangam gotras belong both to poets and subjects of poems: “kauśikan” (Aka. 66) and “gautamanār” (Patiṟṟu 3), “ātreya” (Puṛa. 175) being poets and “kauniyan,” the subject of Puṛa. 166. 
51Thennilapuram P. Mahadevan, “The Institution of Gotra, the Ṛgveda, and the Brahmans.” The Fourth International Vedic Workshop, Austin, 2007. 
52We have two epigraphic attestations of this: at Epigraphia Indica XXII (1933-34:167-176); Item 27, (“Tirodi Plates of Pravara Sena II,” “hārkari” is listed as the gotra affiliation of a donee, Varunācārya, by name, located Bālāghāt District in Central Privinces [Madhya Pradesh]. This gotra is not attested in BŚS, the canonical list of gotras linked to the śrauta praxis. Epigraphia Indica (XIV (:163-168), Item 11, “Saṅgōḷi Plates of Harivarman, 8th year” records a grāmadeya to 23 Brahmans of 8 gotras, all well versed in AV, dated to 6th century CE from Vaijayanti, the modern Banavāsi in Śirśi Tālūk in North Kanara District. Harivarman of the Kadamba dynasty is the king. The Brahmans bear the following gotras: Kaimbala (5 donees), Kālāśa (4), Cauliya (1), Valandata (2)—none attested in the BŚS list. The village is apparently extant as Saṅgōḷi on the Malaprabhā in Belgaum. 
53Vinod Bhattatirippad, Personal Communication, June 26 2007; O. N. Damodaran Nambudirippad, Personal Communication, June 23 2007. 
54Indeed, the importance of the gazetteer literature to our understanding of the British India, and one may add the pre-modern period, cannot be over-emphasized. As Ian Jack (2001: xviii) remarks, in a different context, “... as an inventory of India and its great variety the Imperial Gazetteer has never been bettered.” The pervasive ethos of political correctness will not now allow a continuation. 
55J.R.Marr (1985) 
56See Parpola (1984: 442-448): Hastiśarman is the paternal grandfather of the famous Bhavatrāta, the author of a commentary of the Jaiminīya Śrauta Sūtra; he married Brahmadatta’s daughter (of Viśvāmitra gotra) in Malabar and Mātṛdatta was their son. Mātṛdatta was apparently a Vedic prodigy and much in demand both among Brahmans and kings to find enough time to impart to Bhavatrāta, his son, the traditional svādhyāya and thus the latter was taught by his maternal grandfather, Brahmadatta. In due course, Bhavatrāta himself becomes a famous Śrautin, performing the office of the Subrahmaṇia priest of the praxis of the audgatram for the famous Mēḻattōḷ, the figure credited with the revival of śrautism among the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās through his 99 Agniṣṭomas. See also Parpola (Agni [II] 1983: 700-36). 
108 
Professor Paropla’s edition of the Jaiminīya Śrauta Sūtra—that is, representing the Pūrvaśikhā praxis of the audgatram—is still eagerly anticipated. 
57The geographical pattern of the settlements further questions the notion of the sea-borne arrival of the Nambudiris: the estuary of the river at Ponnani is a wide swathe. But if one follows the course of the Bhāratap-Puḻa from the Palghat mountains, in the Silent Valley region, toward the Arabian sea, one is actually traversing through the sites of the traditionally most important families of the community. There can be little doubt that the movement of the Brahmans was east-west, not west-east. 
58Ramanujan (1985: 323): “34 poets’ names include Kaṇṇan in them. Later, of course, Kaṇṇan was the Tamil form of Kṛṣṇa.” 
59K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Culture and History of Tamils (Calcutta: Firma K.L.Mukhopodhyaya, 1984: 19): “[I]n the Tamil country...we have a historical night after the Sangam period, the curtain rising again only toward the latter part of the 6th century AD. Then we hear of the mysterious and ubiquitous enemy of civilization, the evil rulers called the Kaḷabhras, had come and upset the established political order which was restored only by the more or less simultaneous emergence of the Pāṇdyas and the Pallavas of the Siṃhaviṣṇu line in the Tamil land and of the Chālūkyas of Badāmi across the Tuṅgabhadra in western Deccan.” 
60The text of the Vēlvikkuṭi Plates was published in EI [XVII] 1923-24: 291, but Krishna Sastri’s 1923 translation was found inadequate and was amended by S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar (1941:473). Interpreting Ta. vēlvi in the name of the village to signify “ritual” or “sacrifice” (DEDR #5544 [506]), Aiyangar showed that the text refers to Vēlvikkuṭi as a brahmadeya grant to Korkai Kilan Narkoṟṟan for holding śrauta rituals from the Pāṇṭiyan King Paliyāka Muṭukuṭumi, himself a fabled ritualist as the name indicates and as we know from Puṛanānūṛu 15; see Section D.iii below. Indeed, Korkaikilan Narkoṟṟan’s name resembles in both its phonology and construction those of Sangam poets. In other words, we have here an historical Pūrvaśikhā Brahman, shown as a śrauta ritualist, justifying the name of the village. It is this village that the Kaḷabhras dispossess from his descendants and is being restored to a later, descendant branch, ca. 620-30 CE, in Aiyangar’s estimate (473), by Kaṭuṅkōn, the whole act being memorialized and reaffirmed by Neṭucaṭayan Parāntaka, the sixth descendant from Kaṭuṅkōn, on his third Regnal Year, 769-70, to a present descendant of the original donee family, Kāmakkāṇi Naṛ-Cingar, a name recognizable as a form of Viṣṇu, namely Narasiṃha, illustrating by this date the rise of Vaiṣṇava sectarianist tendencies. As Aiyangar notes (473-4), we have to give a considerable interval from the date of Kuṭumi who originally made the grant, which gave the name Vēlvikkuṭi to the village to the date of its dispossession by the Kaḷabhras; similarly, we have to make allowance for a comparatively long occupation of the Pāṇṭiya country by the Kaḷabhras for Kaṭuṅkōn’s restoration in ca. 620-30 CE. However, by far the most interesting aspect of the Vēlvikkuṭi plates, unremarked by Aiyangar and other historians, is the extreme durability of the family of the donee: it is first recorded in the era of the Paliyāka Kuṭumi of the Sangam era; it then appears as a family dispossessed by the invading Kaḷabhras; the land is restored to the family in the beginning of 7th century, several centuries later; the grant is being ratified, to the continuing line of Narkoṟṟan, late 8th century. We cannot help but think that other Narkoṟṟan-like families were similarly dispossessed, some fleeing. N. Subrahmanian (1996:111) notes that “it is also known that a number of Brahmins migrated to the western parts of the Cērar country particularly when the Kalappirar [Kaḷabhra] were upsetting the social order of Tamil Nadu (my parenthesis).” We know that the Nambudiri tradition orients its śrauta tradition, roughly from this period, in the figure of Mēḻattōḷ. 
61The anti-Jain sentiments of the Śaiva poetry are to be found in the Tevāram songs of both Appar (6.3) and Sambandar (3.108), generally on grounds of want of ritual purity. The Jain practice of plucking hair of the body seems to have attracted particular bile from the Saivite poets. See M. Arunachalam (1979: 49-50) for a composite picture culled from Sambandar’s Tēvāram songs. 
62Hart (1975: 29) likens the Bhakti poets—the Āḻvārs and Nāyanmārs--to the Sangam bards going about the Tamil country “singing ecstatic songs about Śiva and Vishnu.” The loyalty of the Sangam bard to his king 
109 
transforms into the devotional loyalty of the Bhakti poets to a sectarian god. Ramanujan (1981: 98-99): “[T]he conventional phrases of praise offered to kings in classical Tamil heroic poems” are transferred to God in Bhakti poetry. “In bhakti, all the insignia of a king become the Lord’s, as in South Indian temples—white umbrellas, elephants, yak tails, etc. In Tamil, kō means both “king” and “god”; koyil means both “palace” and “temple” (98). 
63The seven temples to which the historical śrauta segment of the Nambudiri community is affiliated are to be found on both sides of the river: Perincullūr, Karikkar, and Ālathiyūr north from the right bank of the river and Panniyūr, Śukapuram, Peruvanam, and Irinjalakkuda, south from the left bank of the river. Except for Perincellūr, the other six temples dot both sides of the Nīlā [Bhāratapuḻa] River. Perincellūr is situated in the far north, in Cannanore district, and does not fall within the live śrauta core of Nambudiri community, the latter is clustered on the banks of the Nīlā River. Perincellūr is often taken to be (Veluthath 1978) the “Cellūr” of Sangam poetry (Aka. 90), dating from before the Kaḷabhra Interregnum. 
64See Chapter III of my forthcoming “Arrival of Vedism in South India: the Pūrvaśikhā and the Aparaśikhā Brahmans.” 
65“Best” is Sukthankar’s (1933:lxxviii) phrase. Other editors echo this: De (1958:XXX) notes that the Malayalam version is “the most important and representative Southern version;” Belvalkar (1947: CXI): “The Malayalam is the primary Southern version.” 
66It is difficult to decide this as we do not have an extant Σ-SR version, the text we know remained behind with the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās: we have only the Grantha-Telugu version, a result of interaction between the Σ-text and the σ-text, a northern text that Sukthankar constructs theoretically from the evidence of the manuscripts. 
67 See Namboothiri.com website for information on the legends of Mēḷattōḷ. 
68These are: Kalakanḍathūr; Mēḻattōḷ, Māthūr, Kulukkallūr, Cemmaṅgād, Pālūr, Muriṅgoth, and Veḷḷa. 
69See note 42 above for a list of these temples. 
70See Ramavarma, Kuññikkuttan Tamburan (1998: 241-273): “Although Koduṅgallūr Kuññikkuttan Tampuran served Kerala in many great ways, there cannot be two opinions that the metrical and pāda translation, in single-handed labour of 2 and 3⁄4 years, of a lakh and quarter verses of the Mahābhārata (including Harivaṃśa), stands out as his single greatest service” (My translation). The prince began work on the translation on the Vernal Equinox of 1904 and brought the project to a completion in 874 days in October 1907 at the rate of 143 granthas a day although the original plan was to attempt 50 (with the Harivaṃsa taking another three months). Ramavarma shows the literary culture behind the entire project to have been of a high order: the original plan, ca. end of 1892, was apparently to translate the epic into a kiḷippāṭṭu mode as a team effort of 10 or 12 poets and scholars, with the Āraṇya-, Śalya-, and Śānti (minus Mokṣa)-parvans being the prince’s share of the project. Apparently the prince met his target, but the project came to nothing as others failed to meet their quota. Early in 1904 the prince was involved in another team project, the translation of the Kṣemendra’s Bhāratamañjari, with the prince taking up its Droṇaparvan and his translation appearing serially in magazines in five issues, but this project too came to nothing. Thus when he embarked on the project of the full translation of the epic including Harivaṃśa, all by himself, on the day of the spring equinox of that year, on the first day of the uttarāyana of the sun, he was sufficiently ready. I have gone into such length here to show the ease with which the entire epic functioned in the literary life of Kerala and was handled by poets and scholars. 
71Friedhelm Hardy (1983) shows beyond doubt that this is the case: as he notes (413), “I would strongly doubt that the Āḻvārs were familiar with the versions [of Kṛṣṇa story] found in Br/ViP [Brahma and Viṣṇupuraṇas]....[I]t seems fairly certain [Periyāḻvār] cannot have known the BhP [Bhāgvatapurāṇa] either” (Parenthetical glosses mine). Posing the question (413), “Where does Periyāḻvār take his mythical themes 110 
[bālacarita; gopi metier]?” Hardy answers, “We know that the Harivaṃśa most probably was one of his sources.” As we have already seen, Mahabhārata (II Appendix I: Item #21): 386-422 is substantively derived from adhyāyas 38, 41, 42 of Harivaṃśa. 
72I use the term ‘interpellation’ after Louis Althusser (1971: 127-186), how a people are reduced in status on racial, religious, cultural or economic grounds: the Tamil Pūrvaśikhās as a whole faced such an interpellation, after being reduced to a minority population by the immigrant Aparaśikhā Brahmans, the latter arriving, it should be added, at royal favour so much so that the marginalization of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans in the Tamil country—among Brahmans groups as intra-group phenomenon--is an obvious feature of its ethno-history. I begin with N. Subrahmanian’s (1989: 178; n.5) anecdote about placing social status of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans in the Tamil country in general: “[A] wise person once said that among the Brahmins the Brihatcharanas and Ashtasahasras were brahmins, Vadamas were kshatriyas, the Vathimas were vaisyas and Śoliyas chaturthas [i.e. the Śūdras].” The first three groups make up the main body of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans; the near autochthonous Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās are seen as outside the pale. It must be added that the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās show themselves as an interpellated group in their first attestation in ethnological literature, appearing in Abbe Du Bois (ca. 1790’s; 1897:110): “There are also Brahmans known as Cholias, who are more or less looked down upon by the rest. They appear to be conscious of their own inferiority, for they hold themselves aloof from the other Brahmans.” Whether their aloofness originated from a consciousness of inferiority is an open question, but Dubois points to the historical distinctness between the Aparaśikha and the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans well into the early 19th century CE. Dubois adds that the Śōḻiya association with the non-Brahman groups of the Tamil country, involving rituals in which blood is shed, is the basis for the low status. This confirms the main point of my argument, that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans were the first to arrive in the Tamil country and as seen in the Sangam poetry already accultured to the indigenous Tamil population—indeed, to such an extant that Hart (1973: 51) thinks that the Sangam era Brahmans were “unlike” their northern counterparts. If we accept that śrautism is the main, original Brahman profession, then we see that these Pūrvaśkhā Brahmans were and are not different from their northern brethren. In fact, as noted, śrautism is a central feature of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans. It must be noted that the devotion to śrautism did not prevent the rise of Bhakti ethos in the same Brahman group: we see this in the fact that the entire the Brahman component of the Nālāyiradivyaprabhandam were Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, and the Vaiṣṇava Bhakti movement (and the same can be said for its Śaivite branch) with its seven non-Brahman Āḻvārs of the twelve represents fundamental acculturation by the Pūrvśikhā Brahmans into the Tamil world. The Aparaśikhā Brahmans must certainly have been aware of this at their first arrival from the 5th century CE onward. Yet, ironically, both in religion and epic, they accept the Pūrvaśikhā precedent. 
73Swamy Deśikan, Yatirāja Saptati. Ed. Varadachari Sadagopan and tr. C.G.Balaji. 2007: 46-47. Web publication: yatiraja_saptati_part 1 (PDF). 
74The first three Āḻvārs are sometimes classified as Brahmans as well, originating in the Tonṭaimanṭalam area (Gopinatha Rao 1917:2), but clearly mythological figures, all three represented as having been born within a flower on successive days from the same parent. On the other hand, Periyāḻvār (and Āṇṭāḷ), Toṇṭaraṭippoṭi, and Maturakavi seem “historical” figures: I met the 224th descendant of Pariyāḻvār, Vētappirān paṭṭi Govindaraja Iyengar, at his home in Āṇṭāḷ Sannidhi Street, Srivillipputhrur on 24, July, 2006 and was able to confirm that he was a Baudhāyana by sūtra and Aghamarṣaṇa-Kauśika-Vaiśvāmitra (aka Śālāvata) by gotra. Toṇṭaraṭippoṭi Āḻvār was Baudhāyana by sūtra and Maturakavi, a Jaiminīya (gotras unknown for both). 
75Kuññikkuṭṭan Tampuran’s (of note 46 above) father was the famous Veṇmaṇi Atcchan Nambudiri, part of a literary movement named after the Veṇmaṇi family. 
76 Sukthankar (1933: v-ix): A total of 235 Ādiparvan manuscripts came to Poona with the following breakdown and script-based distributions: 108 in Devanāgarī; 32 in Bengāḷi; 31 in Grantha; 28 in Telugu; 26 in Malayalam; 5 Nepāli; 3 in Śārada; 1 in Maithilī; 1 in Nandanāgarī. 60 were actually used. 
111 
77We have a fascinating account of the now lost craft of writing—the preparation of the writing medium from the black palm leaves, the utensils and implements of its technology—in Kānippayyūr Sankaran Nambudirippad Ente Smaraṇakaḷ (1964 [II]: 187-195). The social group of ‘kuruppu’ formed apparently the scribal caste. Nambudirippad notes that the Pūrvaśikhā Nambudiris still relied on oral tradition for the Vedic texts and only reluctantly reduced anything Vedic into writing—well into the 20th century. The kuruppus being non-Brahmans may not read anything Vedic: this square was circled by the strict injunction to the kuruppus that they may not read jointly more than four letters at a time. See K.Gough (1968). 
78The Aparaśikhā Vedic texts: Staal’s Nambudiri Veda Recitation (1961) although focusing on the Nambudiris, is fully informative about the Aparaśikhā texts: see Chapter 2 (21-30), “The Veda Recitation of Tamil Brahmans.” His ‘Tamil Brahmans’ are my Aparaśikhā Brahmans—as indeed universally so, as I note in the text below. Kashikar and Parpola (1983:199-251) “Śrauta Traditions of Recent Times” note on their section for, again, the Tamil Brahmans: “The schools followed in the Śrauta rituals Āpastamba of the Yajurveda, Āśvalāyana of the Ṛgveda, and Drāhyāyana and Kauthuma of the Sāmaveda (233).” I have corroborated this over two field trips, 2001 and 2004, to the extent of finding that the Śōḷiya Pūrvaśikhā Vaidikas in urban centers today train themselves in the Āpastamba tradition, as the Aparaśikhās predominate in numbers—and thus prospective clients. Also, the Tamil Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās perform the śrauta rituals using the existing Āpastaṃba cadre of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, available in the Tanjavur- Kumbakona area. 
79Śukla Yajurveda is attested today in Kerala, around Palghat area, in the both Kāṇva and Mādhyandina traditions, but this is the result of a fairly recent migration from the Tamil country of Brahmans, both Aparaśikha and Pūrvaśikhā, from along the Kaveri delta, to the Palghat area ca. 16th-17th century CE and afterward. 
80Kashikar & Parpola, “Recent Śrauta Traditions” (Agni [II] 1983: 199-251): 233: “The schools followed in the śrauta rituals of Tamil Nadu are Āpastamba of the Yajurveda, Āśvalāyana of the Ṛgveda, and Drāhyāyana and Kauthuma of the Sāmaveda.” 
51The Āpastaṃba tradition forms the backbone of the Aparaśikhā Śrauta tradition, localized by Witzel (1997: 229) on the Yamunā River, around Mathurā, and the two closely related Aparaśikhā Taittirīya traditions, Hiraṇyakēśi [Satyāṣāḍa] and Bhāradvāja, located on the banks of the Ganga, to the east. Together, they constitute a late development in Vedic tradition, ca. 300 CE, with the Āśvalāyana and Kauthuma praxises for its hautram and audgātram adjuncts, respectively. The formation of this Taittirīya school must be seen as a major counter-development to the Vedism of the Kosala-Videha area, with the royal patronage of the Magadha kingdom, the latter derived from the Śukla Yajurveda, its Vājanaseyi Saṃhita. I have alreday indicated above that the Pūrvaśikhā departure from the antarvedi area may be seen as a reaction to the reformed Vedism of the Śukla Yajurveda. The Āpastamba tradition must be seen as covering the entire Mālva territory, extending into the eastern Panjab-Hariyana in the west and the old Kuru area in the north. Its departure from the area, starting with the arrival of the Hūnas in 6th century CE and the Muslims in the later centuries, casts the death knell of śrauta Vedism in the area and the erstwhile heartland of Vedism. However, it survived with the migration of the Aparaśikhā Brahmans from the Mālva plateau to the Tamil country, 6th century CE onward. See below for the Copper Plate epigraphy of the Pallavas and Cōḻas that tells this story. 
82Carman (1974: 32) errs in identifying Periya Nambi (aka Mahā Pūrṇa) as a Pūrvaśikhā Brahman; he was like Rāmānuja himself an Aparaśikhā Brahman, belonging to the Bṛhatcaraṇam group. 
83The ‘Tamil Brahman’ population is generally estimated to be 2 to 3% of the Tamil Nadu population, giving us almost 5 million for the entire state, a high number, I believe. The “vaṭama” group seems to be the largest (Subrahmanian 1972: 334). My estimate of their relative numbers comes from tracking the matrimonial columns of the Hindu newspaper. The once strictly endogamous sub-sect is named in these advertisements, along with the gotra of the prospective groom or bride, the exogamous consideration, the other criterion in Brahman marriages. I must add here that the recent trend, from these advertisements, is 
112 
greater endogamy between the vaṭama and the bṛhatcaraṇam groups, easily the two largest segments of the Aparaśikhā population. For the Hindu newspaper issues of May 26, 2002 and June 23, 2002, I found the following ratio: Vaṭama:209::Bṛhatcaraṇam:71::Vāthima:12:Aṣṭasahasram 25. The scientific validity of these numbers and ratio is open to question. It is possible that the numbers of the vaṭama group are overrepresented in the sample because they, being most and first open to Western education, use the newspaper for matrimonial purposes. However, I believe that it is generally trustworthy for the two biggest groups, the vaṭamas (66%) and bṛhatcaraṇam (22%): the appearance in an English newspaper is a measure of modernity, and as Burton Stein-Brahmans, the Aparaśikhā group was well-favoured., especially its two largest segments. 
84Mahalingam (1988) has brought together (xxvii) “the texts of all Copper Plates and stone inscriptions of the Pallavas in Prākṛt, Sanskrit, and Tamil” from ca. 350 to 875 CE. The data for the Aparaśikhā migration come all from the Copper Plates, mainly from 19 plates, deeding land to Brahmans belonging to the Aparaśikhā Vedic traditions. The earlier deeds are in Prākṛt and Sanskrit written in different Southern Brāhmī scripts, and later the Pallava Grantha script and Tamil. The earlier deeds are all located in the southern reaches of Andhra Pradesh, the Guntūr and Nellore Districts, historically forming with the northern parts of the Tamil country, the Arcot and Kāñcipuram areas, the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam. It is only with Simhavarman, ca. 540 CE that the Pallavas reach the Kaveri river (xxix). 
85Mahalingam (1988: 31-34) 
86Richard A. Frasca (1990) shows that the Toṇṭaimaṇṭalam region is traditionally the core area of the kūthu rituals and performances, the Mahābhārata supplying through the Tamil pāratam its sole repertory. See Map VI. 
87This is a mind boggling detail for a modern investigator. Here is a migration story that casts the Mayflower story into shade, in the proper contexts of both, yet its original Copper Plate land grant deeds occasionally turn up when a tiller turns a clod of soil in the field. One might add that this throws interesting light on the issue whether Indians are historical or not. Epigraphy shows clearly that Indian history was written with zeal in these epigraphic records; it does not seem to have been preserved in equal zeal. Witzel (1990) has anticipated me on this question considers the whole question in some detail concluding 
88Stein (1980: 150) notes with reference to the 300 Brahman villages of Cōḻa period for which we have epigraphic record, “It cannot be claimed to be a complete representation of Brahman villages of the period for new ones come to light ... and all of them may never be known.” 
89See note 34 above. 
90Āgniveśya adhrerents are #212 and 213 of the Taṇṭantoṭṭam Plates of Nandivarman II RY 58[=789 CE]; Jaiminīya adherent is #19 in Chitrur Plates of Nṛpatuṅgavarman RY 6 [875 CE]; the Paviḻiyas are #s: 23; 97; 128; and 134 of the Tanṭantoṭṭam plates. 
91See Thennilapuram P. Mahadevan, “The Institution of Gotra, the Ṛgveda, and the Brahmans.” The Fourth International Vedic Workshop, Austin, 2007. 
92Louis Renou (1950:215; n.1): “In reality one never belongs to more than one school, either through family tradition or initiation....The innumerable dvivedis and particularly trivedins and caturvedins that we find in epigraphy are merely honorific titles[.]” However, it follows as well that these title holders constituted an elite group among their peers. 
93We have accounts of two Nāyaka period brahmadeyas from the living memory of two illustrious Tamil Brahmans of the modern period, one by U.V.Swaminatha Ayyar (1860-1925) and the other by Śākkōṭṭai Krishnasvami Aiyangar (1871-1947). Aiyar (1950: 1-3) tells the story of the foundation of his natal village 
113 
Uttamadānapuram, how a Tanjavur nāyaka king breaks the rule of ekādaśi observance and in expiation founds the village with 24 wells for 48 Brahmans from far and near. Aiyangar’s (1941: [II] 297-98) village is the grāmadeya of Vijayarāghava Nāyaka, the son of Raghunātha Nāyaka in latter’s memory and carrying the name Raghunāthapura, near Kumbakonam. Fortified by the Mahratta kings, when Tanjavur passes into the Mahratta control, the village acquires the name Shahjikkōṭṭe after Shahji, the Viceroy of Bijapur and father of Śivaji, and becoming later the modern Śākkōṭṭe. 
94As Champakalakshmi (2001) notes, “the studies of Burton Stein, Kenneth Hall, and Noburu Karashima are historiographically significant in recognizing that there is no homogeneity in the brahmadeyas of the Tamil region”(61). However, as I show here, there was some homogeneity in the Brahman immigrants sponsored by these post-Kaḷabhra kingdoms, a homogeneity that was to continue into the Pāṇṭiyan and Nāyaka periods to follow. 
95We have a meticulous edition of the text of the Karandai Plates in K. G. Krishnan (1984). However, Krishnan treats the Brahmans of the Karandai Plates as a monolith. Tracking them through their Veda Śākhās as is done in this investigation shows them to be made up at their broadest the two groups of this study. 
96Gonda 1977: 489, note 6: “According to a later text, Ānanda Samhita [see Gonda, Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit, in Volume II of this History, p.144] there were fifteen sūtras of the Yajurveda” (parenthesis in the original). Agastya Sūtra is one of the fifteen named. My field work among the smaller Pūrvaśikhā group being more complete, I would say that this sūtra occurs among the Aparaśikhās rather than the Pūrvaśikhās although I have not established a positive affiliation. Gonda (1977[II]:105) mentions an unpublished Agastya Saṃhita, related to the Pañcarātra tradition: it is not clear if the Agastya Sūtra of the Karandai Plates is linked to this text. 
97For Oldenberg, the J/Śāmbavya Gṛhya Sūtra functions as a control text for the Gṛhya Sūtra traditions of the Ṛgveda. 
98I plan to include the search for this in my next field trip. 
99See K. G. Krishnan (1985: 55-56) about the Andhra Pradesh domiciles of most of the Brahmans. 
100Indeed, Nāthamuni’s natal village, Vīranārāyaṇapuram features in the Cōḻa era epigraphy: The village lies in South Arcot, still in the northern reaches of the Tamil country, founded by Parāntaka II (906-946 CE) in 906 CE. See Ramanujachari (n.d.:272), “Nathamuni and His Times” 
101As I show in my on-going work on Brahman migration, Nāthamuni’s gotra is ṣaṭamarṣaṇa: his father is known as ṣaṭamarṣaṇa Īśvaramuni. Although ṣaṭamarṣaṇa gotra occurs among the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans also, it is never referred to by that rubric, but either as Āṅgirasa or Viṣṇuvṛddha, the pravara formula for the gotra being Āṅgirasa-Paurukutsa-Trāsadasyava. In other words, “ṣaṭamarṣaṇa" is an Aparaśikhā term, like pravacana for the Baudhāyana tradition (or pakaḻiya a Pūrvaśikhā term for the Āśvalāyana tradition). Ramānuja’s family gotra, on the other hand, is hārita: we know that it cannot be Nāthamuni’s ṣaṭamarṣaṇa gotra because the matrilineal descent forbids it in that all male descendants of Nāthamani will be necessarily of the ṣaṭamarṣaṇa gotra 
102Dihejia (1990) adduces support for the Friedhelm Hardy thesis (1983) that the Āḻvār Vaiṣṇavism was independent of the Viṣṇu- and Brahmapurāṇas and that it influenced the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, for example, in the trope of pāvai vow (16-18), girls bathing in the river in mid-winter and praying for fine husbands and children, but represented in the BhP in a ‘restrained way’” (18). Dihejia (22) further shows that the pavai and ciṟṟtil tropes (girls pleading to Kṛṣṇa not to break up their sand castles), the latter absent in the BhP, belong to the Sangam poetry. 
114 
103Jagadeesan (1977: 323) notes the tradition, confirmed for me by Puthur S. Krishnaswami Iyengar Swāmi (2000; 2004), that among Āḻvārs, Periyāḻḷvār (and thus his daughter Āṇḍāḷ also), Tonṭaraṭippoṭī Āḻvār, and Maturakavi Āḻvār and among Ācāryas Uyyakkōṇdār, Tirukkōṭṭiyūr Naṃbi, Eṅgaḷ Āḷvār, Periyavācchan Piḷḷai are Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans. We must note first that all the 3+1 Āḻvārs are Pūrvaśikhā Śoḻiyas and, second, that these are the only Brahmans among the 12 canonical Āḻvārs. The situation alters in the Ācārya phase of Vaiṣṇavism. To begin with, the first Ācārya, Nāthamuni, is an Aparaśikhā Brahman. The fact that all the Brahman Āḷvārs are Pūrvaśikhās might well be the most probative evidence in support of the theses of this work. However, although the Pūrvaśikhā Śōḻiyas supply all the Brahman Āḻvārs and a significant number of the Ācāryas, including Rāmānuja’s most important of the five preceptors, the mantra-preceptor (Tirukkōṭṭiyūr Naṃbi), their new and interpellated status in the Tamil country as a minority leads to such statements as these: “Śōḻiyārs...because of their ‘inferior’ social status and a natural willingness to move upward towards a higher status by religious conversion, an opportunity provided by Śrīvaiṣṇavism, converted in large numbers into Śrīvaiṣṇavism” (Jagadeesan 1977: 322; the author’s quote marks). Yet the same author is our printed source for the data that all founding Āḻvārs and a number of Ācāryas were Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās. It is difficult to see how “founders” can be at the same time “converts.” 
104See Vai Mu Gopalakriṣṇāciriyar, ed. The Villiputhur Mahābhārata (Ādiparvan). Chennai: Kuvai Publications, 1976: vi. His father’s name was Vīrarāghavācārya, and the poet apparently styled himself as “Villiputhūrāḻvār” after Pariyāḻvār, who we know was a Pūrvaśikhā Brahman, raising the possibility that the poet might have also been a Pūrvaśikhā Brahman. 
105Richard A. Fresca (1990) is the fullest treatment of the use of the Mahābhārata in terukkūttu performances. See also Alf Hilterbeitel (1991b). 
106P.P.S Sastri (1933:iii), quoted in Sukthankar 1942[III]: xxix): Sastri is writing about the differences between the Malayalam—our *Pūrvaśikhā text of the Southern Recension—and the Tamil (Grantha)- Telugu version of the Southern Recension: “Not having been subject to Nāyak influence in any manner whatsoever, the tradition handed down by the Malayalam manuscripts preserved the Grantha text, in a purer and more unmixed form than even some early Grantha manuscripts, as the Malayalam Mss. do not seem to have come into contact with the Northern Recension till very recent times.” 
107See Velcheru Narayana Rao et al. Symbols of Substance: Court and State in Nāyaka Period Tamil Nadu. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1992: 1-12. 
108Dirks (1987: 55-107) shows that a distinct “discourse of kingship” exercised this ethos. 
109As S. Krishnasvami Aiyangar (1941 [II]: 286) writes: “He became a great expert with the sword and the shield. He was a past master in the training of elephants. He had mastered both the theory and practice of music. He was a good poet both in Sanskrit and Telugu and was a great scholar in the art of literature.” Aiyangar notes that he composed the Pāñjātaharaṇam in two yāmas (six hours) and scribes had difficulty keeping pace with his composition. At his death, the leading woman poet of his court, Rāmabhadrāmba, composed a Sanskrit epic on his life. 
110Indeed, the role of the Sarasvatī Mahāḷ Library as a supplier of manuscripts to the CE project is worth a study in itself, the Sourthern Recension texts of the Tamil (Grantha)-Telugu script being only one of the areas of interest. 
111I. Mahadevan (1994) “From Orality to Literacy: the Case of the Tamil Society” notes (180-181) that Tamil literacy had an “earlier commencement;” the ruling agencies depended on the “use of local language for all purposes from the beginning”; and literacy had a “popular democratic character.” 
112Hart (1975: 147) draws a radical distinction between the orality of the Pāṇans and literacy of the Pulavans of higher social standing. “Even though the Pulavans did not belong to the low castes, and did 
115 
not have the ritual status to play the instruments of those, they did compose songs modeled on those of the oral bards” (148), suggesting the Tamil Brāhmī script as the alphabet of these literate songs. 
113I. Mahadevan (135) translates the relevant Aka. verse thus: “[L]ike the (jaina) monks whose bodies are emaciated by fasting and not bathed (Mahadevan’s parenthesis).” 
114Hart (69-72) has only rather general and vague remarks on the aspects of Jainism (and Buddhism) in Sangam poetry: “There are many poems on the ephemeral nature of life that seem certainly have been influenced by Buddhist and Jaina ideas” (69). 
115We have the famous instance in the third Ten of Patiṟṟuppattu of the Cēra King Palaiyānaccel Keḻukkuṭṭavan hosting the heavenly ascent of his poet Gautamanār and his wife, at the performance of the 10th Śrauta ritual, with echoes to the 100 agniṣṭomas of Mēḻattōḷ Palaiyanār Gautamanar was the King’s poet; Melangath Narayanankutti (2003: 378-79). J.R.Marr (1985:299-300). 
116This is the Ehret model (1988) which Michael Witzel has used in his writings (1999, 2003) to characterize the mutual acculturation between the immigrant Vedic Aryans and the indigenous peoples of South Asia in the Vedic period. The Vedic oral traditions would constitute in this model a sort of prestige or status kit, with the host populations adapting themselves into these oral traditions, transforming them in the process. A similar accultuluration is evident in the early Tamil history, between immigrant Brahmans with the Pūrvaśikhā Śrauta traditions and the indigenous chieftains and kings. As in the Vedic context, the acculturation was certainly mutual so much so that Hart (1975: 55) considers the “earliest Brahmans” of the Tamil country to resemble their northern counterparts very little—however, rather incorrectly in terms of their śrauta Vedism. Hart’s discussion of the “different types” of Brahmans of the Tamil country is rather in the abstract. The Vedic traditions of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans allow us to trace them to the Yamunā- Gangā doab. On the other hand, it is quite true that the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans did acculturate themselves completely with their host Tamil society, their roles, first in the production of the poems of the Sangam anthologies and second, in the development of the Bhakti traditions being an illustration. And as I have noted above, the Aparaśikhā Brahmans did consider their host Purvaśikhā Brahmans “different” and interpellate them to a lower status. 
117Thus in recent scholarship, the anti-Jain sentiments in the Śaiva-Bhakti poetry of Appar and Tirujñānasaṃbandar is seen as the Hindu “othering” (Petersen 1998: 163-186) the Jain, a view supported by Richard H Davis (1998: 213-224): indeed, the Bhakti poetry does contain anti-Jain sentiments; see note 40 above. However, the hostility to Jainism is entirely new: it is not encountered in the Sangam poetry with a significant Brahman-Śrauta content, nor in the Tamil-Brāhmī inscriptions. Indeed as I. Mahadevan notes, Jainism was the paramount attested religion in the Tamil-Kerala country from 3rd century BCE to about 2nd century CE. It is with the arrival of the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans that we begin to see the decline of the royal patronage toward Jains and Jainism. However, the Jains are still far from the “other” all through this period. The anti-Jain sentiments begin to appear in the Tamil country only after the Kaḷabhra Interregnum (see below), and I would be arguing, caused by it in as much as the Kaḷabhras were Jains. Even so, it is hardly obvious that the Śaivite Nayanmārs “other” the Jains, as fashionable as the notion may be. The main grounds of the Śaivite criticism of Jains seem to be based, as noted above, on matters of ritual purity. 
118K.A.N Sastri (1955) 1976: 144: “A long historical night ensues after the close of the Sangam period. When curtain raises again afterward, the close of the 6th century AD, we find that a mysterious and ubiquitous enemy of civilization, the evil rulers called the kaḷabhras have come and upset the established political order which was restored only by their defeat at the hands of Pāṇtiyas as well as Cālūkyas of Bādāmi.” 
119Raghavan (1962: 7): “The Cōḷiyas who wear their tuft on the front of their heads and are to be found both in Tanjore and Tirunelveli villages are followers of the Ṛgveda. Ālaṅgudi, Rādhāmaṅgalam, Kunniyūr, Tiruvayāru are villages in Tanjore having Ṛgvedins. In Tirunelveli district, Ṛgvedins are to be found in Vallanādu, in Śrivaikunṭam Taluq; they are also to be found in Vembattūr near Sivagaṅga. Among the 
116 
Cōḷiyas or Mukkāṇis of Tiruchendūr temple and of Maṇakkarai and Trivandrum, the prevalent Veda is the Ṛk (Śākhala Śākhā). Further, “[i]n Palghat...Koḍunthirappaḷḷi [and] Añjumūrtimangalam near Alattur are noted for their Jaiminīya Sāmagas. They belong to the Cōḷiya class of Brahmans” (13). The three Ṛgveda adhyāpakas in the Kumbakonam Veda Pāṭaśāla were from this group, in 2006. 
120See E.R.Sree Krishna Sarma, Kauṣītakibrāhmaṇa. 3 Volumes. Wiesbaden: F. Steiner, 1968-76. Neḍḍuṃ Bhavadrātan Nambudiri, the Hota of the Trichur Agniṣṭoma (2003) was an eye witness, as a boy, of this transaction, the entire proceeding staying in his mind because it was his first sight of a tape recorder. 
121The grant occurs in the Tanṭantottam Plates (789 CE); see Mahalingam (1988: 303, line 198) 
122The Hindu newspaper of August 12, 2007 carried the following caption: 
Chennai today: RELIGION 
Ramayanam: A.R. Chandrasekar, 5, Postal Colony, 2nd St., West Mambalam, 5.30 p.m.; Gagan Chaitanya, R.S. Kalyana Mandapam, 26A, Oragadam Road, 6.45 p.m.; Keeranoor Ramamurthi, Desikan Pravachana Mandapam, 26, St., Thillai Ganga Nagar, Nanganallur, 7 p.m. 
Mahabharatham: Dhamodhara Deekshithar, Vallaba Ganapathy Veera Anjaneyar Temple, Muthulakshmi Nagar, Chitlapakkam, 7 p.m. 
Bhagavatham: Gomatam Madhavachariar, Aasthika Samajam, 124, 3rd St., Venkateswara Nagar, Pozhichalur, 5 p.m. 
Gita: K.R. Neelakantan, Sri Aurobindo Society Centre, J Block, 8th St., Anna Nagar, 6 p.m. 
Vishnu Sahasranamam: P. Badrinath, Sri Manavaala Mamunigal Sannithi, 57, Bhimanan St., Alwarpet, 4 p.m. 
Meeravum Andalum: M.K. Ramanan, Asthika Samajam, Venus Colony, Alwarpet, 6.30 p.m. 
Valli Kalyanam: R. Mohandoss, Vidya Akadamy, Hariharan Hospital Road, Nanganallur, 6 p.m. 
Thayumanavar: P. Venkatesan, Kothandaramar Temple, Old Washermanpet, 4 p.m. 
123See Gregory Nagy (2002: 36-69) for a discussion of the Panathenian festival and the roles of the rhapsodes in singing the Homeric epics to the Greek public. 
124Sastri seems to have been influenced by the Parvasaṃgraha of the Northern Recension: as Sukthankar (1933[I]: xxxiii) notes that Sastri’s edition follows the 18-parvan convention of the Northern Recension, although his manuscripts follow the 24-parvan division of the Southern Recension. 
125Hiltebeitel (2001): “[T]he Mahābhārata was written by ‘out of sorts Brahmans’ who may have had some minor king’s or merchant’s paronage, but, for personal reasons, show a deep appreciation of, indeed exalt, Brahmans who practice the ‘way of gleaning’: that is uñcavṛtti Brahmans reduced to poverty who live a married life and feed their guests and family by ‘gleaning” grain’” (The author’s quote marks). 
126I owe this coinage to Carrie Cowherd of the Classics Department of Howard University, Washington D.C. August 9th 2007. 
117 
127George Hart (“Use of Devanāgarī”: 9.4.2007 Indology list): “I would be interested in getting some feedback on this matter--when and where did Devanagarī become standard for Sanskrit? I would guess that it begins fairly early in the North and only reaches South India in the 20th century.” Ashok Aklujkar responded (9.4.2007): “I suspect that Devanagarī gradually became "Sanskrit script" for South India in the late 19th and the early 20th century mainly because relatively inexpensive editions of Skt texts were produced in Devanagarī by presses such as the Nirnayasagar Press, the Venkateshwar Press, and the Sarasvati-yantra or Saraswati Press (of Jibananda Vidyasagara). The Vani-vilasa Press in South India might also have played a significant role in this process.” Both scholars ignore the Brahman migration to the south from areas where Devanāgarī had become prevalent. As I have noted above, some of the oldest Mahābhārata ms. from the Sarasvatī Mahāl Library were in Devanāgarī; the class of ms. D1-D14 of the Ādiparvan (I: XVIII-XX). D2, for instance, is dated 1598, CE, written at Benares by Govinda. There is little doubt that the Devanāgarī script arrived in the Tamil country with the Aparaśikhā Brahmans, during 14th CE and later. The Devanāgarī script was part of the educational curriculum of the (Aparaśikhā) Tamil Brahmans, and it never became part of the education of the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, although with significant activity in Sanskrit writing and composition. 
128All the information on the transmission of the Sophocles MSS is from R. Jebb, Sophocles (1906: vii- xliv), “Introduction.” 
129Būrjapatra appears as an item of trade in the Ramayaṇa at 2.1905*. See Brockington (1984: 66). 
130I. Mahadevan makes a sharp distinction between Upper South India and the Tamil area: the former was not politically independent, being part of the Nanda-Maurya imperial system, with the Prākṛt language and script imposed upon the population whereas with its political independence from northern empires, the Tamil area was able become literate in a democratic and popular way in its own language and script: “As a direct result of political independence, Tamil remained the language of administration, of learning and instruction, and of public discourse throughout the Tamil country. When writing became known to the Tamils, the Brāhmī script was adapted and modified to suit the Tamil phonetic system. That is, while the Brahmi script was borrowed, the Prakrit language was not allowed to be imposed along with it from outside. When the Jaina and Buddhist monks entered the Tamil country, they found it expedient to learn Tamil in order to carry on their missionary activities effectively. An apt parallel is the case of the European Christian missionaries in India during the colonial period, who mastered the local languages to preach the gospel to the masses.” We must certainly add to the Jains and the Buddhists, the Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans, first attested in Sangam poetry. 
131The ōla or the palm leaf was a widely used article of literacy well into the 20th century so that in its early decades it functioned in Kuññikkuṭṭi Tamburān’s correspondence very much like a post card, when the use of paper had become widespread, with newspapers, some like the Malayala Manorama, playing influential roles in the literary life of the public. The first best seller of Malayalam literature appears about this time, in the 1890’s, that of Koṭṭārattil Śaṅkuṇṇi׳s Aitihyamāla, first appearing in the Manōrama newspaper serially. 
132Personal Communication, at the AOS annual conference at Chicago, March 15-17, 2008. Could the entire epic, practically its present extent in the Poona CE, have formed in an oral tradition? And transmitted in an oral tradition? In the text of my paper, I note the extra-ordinary feats of the oral tradition in South Asia, but always in the Vedic context, with an elaborate system of the svādhyāya institutions. It is sometimes envisaged as for instance by Biardeau that there may be actual Indians, not far from the earlier Blavatski fantasies of the Secret Masters hiding in the Himalayas, who could master the entire Mahābhārata into memory and recite it. 
133Staal [I]1983: 193-273. “[T]he priests were engaged in rehearsals from December 1974 until April 1975. Nellikkat Nīlakaṇṭhan Akkititippad and Iṭṭi Ravi Nambudiri supervised the Sāmaveda rehearsals in Panjal, while Cherumukku Vaidikan and Erkkara supervised all other rehearsals, which took place in Shoranur” (273). As the Dramatis Personae (I: 266-67) of the 1975 Agnicayana show, the ṛtviks were veterans and brought years of training and practice in erstwhile śrauta rituals to their work as the priests. 
118 
See Mahadevan and Staal (2003) for the ground-level workings of the Nambudiri śrauta system: the 1975 Hota functioned as the ācārya for the hautram praxis of the 2003 Agniṣṭoma at Trichur; the yajamāna of this Agniṣṭoma was the son of the yajamāna of the Kundoor Agnicayana (2001). 
134No modern student of the śrauta traditions saw this more clearly than Frits Staal, who envisaged the Nambudiri Śtrautins to be “professionals,” very much like scholars and scientists, engaged in a self- sustaining activity. 
135Ikari (1998:2) notes that the last Somayaga in the Vādhūla tradition took place in the 1920’s. I have not been able to confirm this. It does not appear in the Agni II list (252-255) of the “Recent Nambudiri Performances of Agniṣṭoma and Agnicayana” nor in the revised list in the Namboothiri.com website. 
136I have come across individual Pūrvaśikhā Śōḻiya Brahmans who have performed the Agniṣṭoma in Kumbakonam area, but following the Aparaśikhā praxis available in the area. Interestingly, they show surprise when told of an ancient Pūrvaśikhā Śrauta tradition outside the Āpastaṃba-Drāhyāyana axis of the Aparaśikhā Śrauta tradition. 
137The problem of Bhṛguization is discounted in the epic traditions: C. Minkowski (1989). But as I argue elsewhere a case for it can be made in the period of the formation of the Ṛgveda (“The Institution of the Gotra, the Ṛgveda, and the Brahmans [2007]); the Bhrgus do appear first in all Pravara lists, although their output in the Ṛgveda is relatively little for their great prominence in the subsequent periods. 
119 
Abbreviations 
Indian Texts: 
Sanskrit: 
ĀgGS Āgniveśya Gṛhya Sūtra ĀŚS Āsvalāyana Śruta Sūtra ĀGS Āśvalāyana Gṛhya Sūtra ĀpŚS Āpastaṃba Śrauta Sūtra BD Bṛhaddevata BŚS Baudhāyana Śrauta Sūtra BhP Bhāgavata Purāṇa BhrP Brahma Purāṇa BhŚS Bhāradvāja Śrauta Sūtra DŚS Drāhyāyana Śrauta Sūtra HV Harivaṃśa JS Jaiminīya Saṃhita JB Jaiminīya Brahmaṇa JŚS Jaiminīya Śrauta Sūtra KauS Kauthuma Sāmaveda KB Kauṣītaki Brahmaṇa KGS Kauṣītaki Gṛhya Sutra KŚS Katyāyana Śrauta Sūtra LŚS Lāṭyāyana Śrauta Sūtra Rām Rāmāyaṇa ṚV Ṛgveda SŚS Satyāṣādha Śrauta Sūtra ŚGS Śānkhāyana Gṛhya Sūtra ŚŚS Śānkhāyana Śrauta Sūtra TS Taittirīya Saṃhita VP Viṣṇu Purāṇa VS Vājanseyi Saṃhita VŚS Vādhūla Śrauta Sūtra 
Tamil: 
Aiṅ Aiṇkuṛunūṛu 120 
Ak. Akanānūṛu Kal. Kalittokai Kuṛ. Kuṛuntokai Naṟ Naṟṟinai Neṭ. Neṭuntokai Patiṟṟu Patiṟṟuppattu Puṛ. Puṛanānūṛu Tol. Tolkāppiyam 
General 
EI Epigraphia Indica JAOS Journal of American Oriental Society JRAS Journal of Royal Asiatic Society DED Dravidian Etymological Dictionary 
Works Cited 
Aiyangar, M. Srinivasa. 1914. Tamil studies or Essays on the history of the Tamil people, language, religion and literature. Madras: Guardian Press 
Aiyangar, S. Krishnaswami. 1941. Ancient India and south Indian history and culture. 2 Volumes. Poona: Oriental Book Agency. 
__________ . 1920. Early Vaiṣnavism. London: Oxford University Press. 
Althausser. 1971. “Ideology and state apparatuses,” in Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays. Tr. Ben Brewster. New York: Monthly Review Press. 
Aklujkar, Ashok. 2007. Use of Devanagari for Sanskrit. Indology List. 9.4.2007 
Anderson, D and Smith, H. 1913. Sutta-nipāta. London: Pali Text Society 
Apte, V.S. 1958. Sanskrit-English Dictionary. 2 volumes. Poona: Prasad Prakashan. 
Arunachalam, M. 1979. The Kaḷabhras in the Pāṇṭiyan country and their impact on the 
life and letters there. Madras: University of Madras. 
Bailey, Gregory and Ian Mabbit. 2003. The Sociology of Early Buddhism. Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 
Belvalkar, Shripad Krishna. 1947. Bhīṣmaparvan. Introduction and apparatus. In 
121 
Sukthankar et al. 1933-70, vol. VII. 
Bhattathippad, Vinod. 2007. Personal Communication. 
Bright, William. 1998. The Dravidian scripts. In Dravidian languages: 40-71. 
Brockington, John L. 1984. Righteous Rama: the evolution of an epic. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Caldwell, Robert. 1875. Observations on the Kuḍumī. Indian Antiquary. 4.43: 166-173 
The Cambridge encyclopedia of ancient languages. 2004. Ed. Roger D.Woodard. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
Cardona. G. 1990. On attitudes toward language in ancient India. Sino-Platonic 
papers.15:1-19. 
Carman, John. 1974. The Theology of Rāmānuja. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Champakalakshmi, R. 2001. Reappraisal of a Brahmanical institution: the brahmadeya 
and its ramifications in early medieval south India.59-84. In Kenneth R. Hall, ed. Structure and Society in early south India: Essays in honour of Noboru Karashima. 59-84. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
Cousins, L.S. 1996. The dating of the historical Buddha: a review article. JRAS, Series 
3.6.1: 57-63. 
Cutler, Norman. 1987. Songs of experience: the poetics of Tamil devotion. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Damodaran Nambudirippad. O. N. 2007. Personal Communication. 
Dandekar, R.N. 1961. Śalyaparvan. Introduction and apparatus. In Sukthankar et al. 
1933-70, vol. XI. 
Davis, Richard. 1992. Ritual in an oscillating universe: worshipping Śiva in medieval 
India. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
_________ . 1998. The story of the disappearing Jains: Retelling the Śaiva-Jain 
encounter in medieval south India. 213-224. In John E. Cort, ed. Open boundaries. Albany: State University Press. 
De, S.K. 1940. Udyogaparvan. Introduction and apparatus. In Sukthankar et al. 1933- 
70, vol. VI 
122 
Deshpande, M. 1993. The changing notion of śiṣṭha from Patañjali to Bhartṛhari. JAOS 
47: 96-115. 
__________ . 2007. The Yājuṣa Hautra dispute in early modern Maharashtra. The Fourth International Vedic 
Workshop. University of Texas, Austin. May 24-27. 
_________ . 2007. Use of Devanagarī for Sanskrit. Indology List. 9.4.2007 
Dihejia, V. 1990. Āṇṭāl and her path of love. Albany: State University of New York 
Press. 
Dirks, Nicholas. 1987. The hollow crown: ethnohistory of an Indian kingdom. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Dines, Anderson and Helmer Smith. 1913. Suttanipāta. London: the Pali Text Society. 
Dravidian Etymological Dictionary. 1984. Burrow, T and M. B. Emeneau, eds. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
Dravidian languages. 1998. Sanford B Steever, ed. London: Routledge. 
Du Bois, Abbe and Henry K. Beauchamp. 1906. Hindu manners, customs, and 
ceremonies. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Edgerton, Franklin. 1944. Sabhāparvan. Introduction and apparatus. In Sukthankar et 
al. 1933-70, vol. II. 
Ehlers, Gerald. 2003. A note on pūrvaśikhā. EJVS 10.4 (Oct. 21) 
Ehret, Christopher. 1988. Language change and the material correlates of language and 
ethnic shift. Antiquity 62, 1988: 564-74. 
Epigraphia Indica. 
Falk, Harry. 1988. Goodies for India: Literacy, orality and Vedic culture. 
Erscheinunungsformen kultereller Prozesse. Jahrbuch 1988 des Sonderforschungsbereichs “Übergange und Spannungsfelder zweichen Mündlichket und Schriftlichkeit.” 103-20. Tubingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. 
Frasca, Richard. 1990. The theater of the Mahabharata: Terukkūttu performances in 
South India. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Fuller, C.J. 1984. Servants of the goddess: the priests of a south Indian temple. 
123 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Geertz, C. 1986. Making experiences, authoring selves. 373-380. In The anthropology of experience, edited by V. Turner and E. Bruner. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
Gombrich, Richard. 1988. How the Mahāyāna began. Journal of Pāli and Buddhist 
Studies. I: 29-46. 
Gonda, Jans. 1977. The ritual sūtras. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz 
Gopalakrishnaciriyar. 1976. The Villipttūr Makāpāratam. Chennai: Koovai 
Publications. 
Gopinatha Rao, T. V. (1917) 1923. Sir Subrahmania Ayyar lectures on the history of Śrī 
Vaiṣṇavas: 17th and 18th December 1917. Madras: Government Press. 
Goody, J. [1985] 1987. The interface between the written and the oral. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Gough, K. 1968. Literacy in Kerala. In J. Goody, ed. Literacy in traditional societies. 
132-160. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hall, Kenneth R. 2001. Merchants, rulers, and priests in an early south Indian sacred 
center: Cidambaram in the age of the Cōḷas. In Kenneth Hall, ed. Structure and society in early south India: Essays in honour of Noburu Karashima. 85-112. New Delhi: Oxford Uniersity Press. 
Hardy, Friedhelm. 1983. Virahabhakti: The early history of Kṛṣṇa devotion in South 
India. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
Hart, George. 1975. The poems of ancient Tamil. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 
__________ . 2007. Use of Devanagarī for Sanskrit. Indology List. 9.4.2007 
Hart, George and Hank Heifetz. 1999. The four hundred songs of war and wisdom. 
New York: Columbia University Press. 
The Hindu. 
Hiltebeitel, Alf. 1988. The cult of Draupadī, I. Mythologies from Gingee to Kurukṣetra. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
124 
________ . 1991a. The cult of Draupadī, II. On Hindu ritual and the goddess. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
________ . 2001. Rethinking the Mahābhārata. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
IIIIIII. 2005. Weighing orality and writing in the Sanskrit epics. In P. Koskikallio, 
ed. Epics, khilas, and purāṇas: continuities and ruptures. 81-111. Proceedings of the Third Dubrovnik International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Puranas. September 2002. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and the Arts. 
________ . 2006. The Nārāyaṇīya and the early reading communities of the 
Mahābhārata. 227-253. In Patrick Olivelle, ed. Between the empires: society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Ikari, Y. 1998. A survey of the new manuscripts of the Vādhūla school—mss. of Ki and 
K4. Zinbun 33: 1-30 
Iyengar, Krishnaswamy Swami, Puthur. 2000; 2004. Personal Communication 
Iyengar, P.T.Srinivasa. 1929. History of the Tamils from the earliest times to 600 AD. 
Madras: C. Coomarasawmy Naidu & sons 
Iyer, L.K. Anantha Krishna. 1909-12. The Cochin tribes and castes. 2 Volumes Madras: 
Higginbotham & Co.; London, Luzac & Co. . 
Jagadeesan, N. 1977. History of Srīvaiśnavism in the Tamil country: Post Ramanuja. 
Madurai: Koovai Publishers. 
Jack, Ian. 2001. A note on Kishoregunj. In Nirad C. Chaudhuri [1951]. The 
autobiography of an unknown Indian. xvi-xvii. New York: New York Review Books. 
Jebb, R. 1906. Sophocles: The text of the seven plays. Cambridge: At the University 
Press. 
Johnson, B.L.C. 2001. Geographical dictionary of India. New Delhi: Vision Books. 
Kailasapathy, K. 1968. Tamil heroic poetry. London: Oxford University Press. 
Karashima, N. 1984. South Indian history and society: studies from inscriptions A.D 800-1800. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
Kashikar, C.G. and Asko Parpola. 1983. Śrauta traditions in recent times. In Agni II: 199-251 
125 
Kashikar. C. G. 1968. A survey of the Srautasūtras: Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. P.V.Kane 
Sanskrit prize endowment lectures. Bombay: University of Bombay. 
Krishnan, K.G. 1983. Karandai Tamil Sangam Plates of Rajendrachola I. Archeo 
logical Survey of India. 
Krishna Sastri. 1923. Velvikkudi Grant of Nedunjadayan, 3rd RY. Epigraphia Indica 
17.16: 291-309. 
Kuiper, F. B. J. 1991. Aryans in the Rigveda. Atlanta: Rodopi. 
Kulke, Hermann and Dietmar Rothermund. 1986. A history of India. London: Croom 
Helm. 
Kunjunni Raja, K. 1983. Sanskrit and Malayalam references. In Agni II: 300-309. 
Lehman, Thomas. 1998. Old Tamil. In The Dravidian languages: 75-99. 
Lehman, Thomas and Thomas Malten. 1993. A word index for Caṅkam literature. 
Madras: Institute of Asian Studies. 
Lubotsky, Alexander. 1997. A R gvedic word concordance. New Haven, Conn.: 
American Oriental Society. 
Mahadevan, Iravatam. 1995. From orality to literacy: the case of the Tamil society. 
Studies in history (new series). 11.2: 173-188. __________ . 2003. Early Tamil epigraphy: from the earliest times to the 8th century CE. Chennai: Crea A. 
Mahadevan, Thennilapuram and Frits Staal. 2003. The turning point in a living tradition: 
Somayagam 2003. EJVS 10.2. 
Mahadevan, Thennilapuram. Forthcoming. The arrival of Vedism in south India: the 
Pūrvaśikhā and Aparaśikhā Brahmans. 
Mahalingam, T. V. 1969. Kāñcīpuram in early south Indian history. Bombay: Asia 
Publishing House. 
__________. Ed. 1988. Inscriptions of the Pallavas. New Delhi: Indian Council of 
Historical Research. 
Marr, J.R. 1985. The eight anthologies: a study in early Tamil literature. Madras : 
Institute of Asian Studies. 
126 
Minkowski, C.Z. 1989. Janamejaya’s sattra and ritual structure. JAOS 109, 3: 401-20 
________ . 1991. Snakes, sattras and the Mahābhārata. In Sharma 1991: 384-400. 
Nagy, Gregory. 2002. Plato’s rhapsody and Homer’s music : the poetics of the 
Panathenaic Festival in classical Athens. Washington, DC : Center for Hellenic Studies. 
Naine, D. T. [1960] 1965. Sundiata: An epic of old Mali. Tr. G.D.Pickett. Essex: 
Pearson Longman. 
Namboothiri.com website. 
Narayana Bhattatiri, Mēlpattūr. Ca. 16th century CE. Rājasūyaprabandha. 
Narayanankutti, Melangath. 2003. Saṅgak-kālacharitam. Trivandrum: Kerala Bhasha 
Institute. 
Narayanan Nambudirippad, O.M.C. [1966-85]1995. Ṛgvedam: Bhāṣābhāṣyam. Trichur: 
D.C.Books. 
Narayana Rao, Velcheru et al. 1992. Symbols of substance: court and state in Nāyaka 
period Tamilnadu. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
Narayana Somayaji. 2005. Personal Communication 
Nilakanta Sastri, K. A. 1955. A history of South India from prehistoric times to the fall 
of Vijayanagar. Madras: Oxford University Press. 
__________. 1964. The culture and history of the Tamils. Calcutta: Firma K. L. 
Mukhopadhyaya 
Norman, K.R. 1995. The group of discourses: Sutta-nipāta. Volume II. Oxford: Pali 
Text Society. 
Oldenberg, Hermann. 1886. The Gṛhya-sūtras, Part I. Introduction and translation. 
[SBE 29]. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
_____________. 1892. The Gṛhya-sūtras, Part II. Introduction and translation. 
[SBE 30]. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Palaniappan, S. 2008. Personal Communication. 
Paramesvara Ayyar, Ulloor. 1953. Kēralasāhityacaritram. Vol.1. Trivandrum: 
University of Travancore. 
127 
Parpola, Asko. 1968. The Śrautasūtras of Laṭyāyana and Drāhyāyaṇa and their commentaries: An English translation and study. Helsingfors: Helsinki. 
_________ . 1973. The literature and study of the Jaiminīya Sāmaveda: In retrospect 
and prospect. Studia Orientalia. 53:3-33. 
_________ . 1984. On the Jaiminīya and Vādhūla traditions of south India and the 
Pāṇḍu/Pāṇḍava problem. Studia Orientalia. 55:429-468. 
. Peterson, Viswanathan Indira. 1998. Śramaṇas against the Tamil way: Jains as others in 
Tamil Śaiva literature. In John E. Cort, ed. Open boundaries. 163-185. Albany: State University Press. 
Powell, B. 2002. Writing and the origins of Greek literature. Cambridge, U.K. : 
Cambridge University Press. 
Pollock, Sheldon. 1984. The Rāmāyaṇa text and the critical edition.” 82-93. In The 
Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmiki: An epic of ancient India, Vol I.: Bālakāṇḍa. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984. 
Raghavan, V. 1962. The Present position of Vedic recitation and Vedic śākhas. 
Kumbakonam: Veda Dharma Paripalana Sabha. 
Raman Nambudiri, Erkkara. 1983. Śrautakarmavivekam. Kunnamkulam: Anadi Books. 
Ramavarma. 1998. Kuññikkuṭṭan Tampurān. Trivandrum: Department of Cultural 
Publications. 
Ramanujan, A.K. 1967. The interior landscape. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
_________ . 1981. Hymns for the drowning. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
_________ . 1985. Poems of love and war, from the Eight Anthologies and the ten long 
poems of classical Tamil. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Rangachari, K. [1931] 1986. The Sri Vaishnava Brahmans. Delhi: Gian Publishing 
House. 
Ray, Himanshu P. 2006. Inscribed pots, emerging identities: the social milieu of trade. 113-143. In Patrick Olivelle, ed. Between the empires: society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE. New York: Oxford University Press. 
128 
Recent Namboothiri Performances of Agniṣṭoma and Agnicayana. In Namboothiri .com 
website. 
Renou, Louis. 1950. The Vedic schools and the epigraphy. In Vishva Bandhu ed. 
Siddhabhāratī. 214-221. Hoshiarpur: V.V.R. Institute: 
Ruegg, David Seyfort and Lambert Schmithausen, eds. 1990. Earliest Buddhism and 
Madhyamaka. Leiden: E.J.Brill. 
Salomon, Richard. 1998. Indian Epigraphy. A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the other Indo-Aryan Languages. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Sankaran Nambudirippad, Kanippayyur. 1986. Pakaḻiyam Cataṅgu. 
Kunnamkulam:Panjangam Press, 
____________. 1963-1964. Ente smaraṇakaḷ. Three volumes. Kunnankulam: 
Panjangam Press. 
Sankunni, Kottaratthil. [1909-1934] 2002. Aitihyamala 8 volumes. Trichur: Current 
Books. 
Sastri, P. P. S., ed. 1933. The Maha bha rata (southern recension). Madras: V. 
Ramaswamy Sastrulu & sons. 
Schmitthausen. 1990. Preface. In Ruegg and Schmitthausen: 1-5. 
Schwartzberg, Joseph E. 1992. A Historical Atlas of South Asia. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Sharma, Arvind, ed. 1991. Essays on the Mahābhārata. Leiden: E.J.Brill. 
Somayajippad, C.V, Ittiravi Nambudiri, and Erkkara Raman Nambudiri. 1983. Recent Nambudiri performances of Agniṣṭoma and Agnicayana. In Agni: II: 252-255. 
Staal, Frits. 1961. Nambudiri veda recitation. The Hague. 
________ . 1983. Agni: the ritual of the fire altar. 2 Volumes. Berkeley: Asian 
Humanities Press. 
________ . 1986. The fidelity of the oral tradition and the origins of science. 
Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company. 
________ . 1989. The independence of rationality from literacy. European Journal of 
129 
Sociology. XXX: 301-310. 
________ . 1989. Rules without meaning: ritual, mantras and the human sciences. 
New York: Lang. 
Stein, Burton. 1968. Brahman and peasant in early south Indian history. The Adyar 
Library Bulletin. 31-32: 229-69. 
_________ 1980. Peasant state and society in medieval south India. Delhi: Oxford 
University Press. 
Steever, Sanford B. 1998. Introduction to Dravidian languages. In The Dravidian 
languages: 1-39. 
___________. 2004. “Old Tamil.” In The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the World’s 
Ancient Languages: 1015-1039. 
Subramania Ayyar, K.V. 1931-32. The Tirumukkūdal inscription of Vīrarājendra. 
Epigraphia Indica 21.38: 220-250. 
Subrahmanian, N. 1966. Pre-Pallava Tamil index: Index of historical material in pre- 
Pallavan Tamil literature. Madras: University of Madras. _____________. 1966. Sangam polity; the administration and social life of the San gam 
Tamils. Bombay: Asia Publishing House 
___________ . 1972. History of Tamil Nad (to AD 1565). Madurai: Koodal 
Publishers. 
_____________. 1989. The Brahmin in the Tamil country. Madurai : Ennes 
Publications. 
____________ . 1996. The Tamils, their history, culture and civilization. Madras: 
Institute of Asian Studies. 
Sukthankar, Vishnu. 1933. Prolegomena. In Sukthankar et al. 1933-70, Volume 1: i- 
cxiii 
Sreekrishna Sarma, E. R. (1968-76). Kaus ītaki-Brāhman a. Wiesbaden, F. Steiner, 1968- 
1976. 
Swami Deśikan. Yatirāja Saptāti. Ed. Varadachari Sadagopan and tr, C.G.Balaji. 2007. 
Web publication: :yatiraja_saptati_part 1 (PDF). 
Takahashi, Takanobu. 1995. Tamil love poetry and poetics. Leiden: E.J.Brill. 130 
Thomas, Rosalind. 1992. Literacy and orality in ancient Greece. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Thurston, Edgar. [1909]1975. Castes and tribes of southern India. 7 volumes. Delhi : 
Cosmo, 1975 
Vaidya, P.L. 1969. Harivaṃśa. Introduction and apparatus. In Sukthankar et al. 1933- 
70. 
Van Buitenan, J.A.B. 1973. The Mahābhārata: I the book of the beginnings. 
Translation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Varier, Raghava and Rajan Gurukkal. 1991. Keralacaritram. Sukapuram: Vallathol 
Vidyapeetam. 
Veluthath. K. 1978. Brahman settlements in Kerala: historical studies. Calicut: Sandhya 
Publications. 
Vekatesam, N. K. 1928. Govinda Diskhita: the miister of the Tanjore kings. The 
quarterly journal of the Andhra historical scciety. II: 220-241 
Younger, Paul. 1995. The home of the dancing Śivan. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Witzel. Michael. 1986. JB pulpūlanī: The structure of a Brāhmaṇa tale. In M. D. 
Balasubrahmaniam, ed., Dr. B. R. Sharma felicitation volume. 189-216. Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha 
__________ . 1987a. The case of the shattered head. Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 
13/14: 363-416. 
__________ . 1987b. On the localization of Vedic texts and schools (materials on Vedic 
śākhās, 7). In Gilbert Pollet ed., India and the ancient world: History, trade and culture before A.D.650. 173-213. Leuvan: Departement Orientalisteik. 
__________ . 1987c. On the origin of the literary device of the 'frame story' in old Indian literature. In H.Falk, ed., Hinduismus and Buddhismus: Festscrift főr Ultrich Schneider. 380- 1987: 380-414. Freiburg: Hedwig Falk. 
__________ . 1989a. Tracing the Vedic dialects. In Collette Caillat, ed., Dialectes dans les litterratures indo-aryennes. Acts of the colloque International, Parisa. Sept.16-18, 1986. Publicationes de L’Institut de Civilisation Indienne. Series 8, Fasc. 55. 97-265. Paris: Edition-Diffusion de Bocard. 
131 
__________ . 1997. The development of the Vedic canon and its schools: The social 
and political milieu. In Michael Witzel, ed., Inside the texts—beyond texts: New approaches to the study of the Vedas. 247-345. Harvard Oriental Series Opera Minora, Vol. 2. Cambridge: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University. 
__________ . 1999a. Substrate language in Old Indo-Aryan (Ṛgvedic, Middle, Late). 
EJVS Vol. 5,1, Aug. 1999, 1-67. 
_________ . 1999b. Vaidics and Vedic religion. Indology List. Thu, 13 May 1999. 
_________ . 2005. The Veda and the epics: Some comparative notes on persons, 
lineages, geography, and grammar. 21-80. In P. Koskikallio, ed., Epics, khilas, and puranas: Continuities and raptures. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on the Sanskrit Epics and Puranas. September 2002. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and the Arts. 
_________ . 2008. Personal Communication 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 140 
141 
Appendix I Pūrvaśikhā Brahmans: Different Groups and Settlements: 
1a. Nambudiris [Namboothiris]: Malayalam-speaking. Traditional home is Kerala, almost exclusively so as to be though aitochthonous, but attested in the Cōḻa land till about the 8th century CE, presumably as part of a larger Pūrvaśikhā population with the many rare Veda śākhās and the forelock kuṭumi common to the entire group. Good, reliable information about the the community is available in the Namboothiri,com, a professionally maintained and managed website. 
A live Śrauta tradition is attested among them, arguably the most authentic. The Śrauta tradition is found clustered, almost like a balloon, directly to the west of the Palghāt gaps, on both sides of the Bhāratapuḻa river and toward the Trichur-Irinjalakuda region, in the far north, in Cannanore. The Śrauta praxis is managed by six Vaidikan families: Ceṛumukku and Taikkāṭ from Śukapuram gramam; Perumpaṭappu and Kaplinġāṭ from Perumānam gramam, and Kaimukku and Pantal from Irinjalakkuda gramam. 
The 1901 census places the entire community at 28,895, with 19279 in the “British” Malabar, 5,326 in Travancore, and 5290 in Cochin. After 1933 with the younger sons in a family being able to marry within the community, there has been an appreciable rise in total numbers, estimated today at about 150, 000 probably a high estimate. 
Tamil-speaking Pūrvaśikhās: 
1b. Non-Vaiṣṇava Śōḻiya Brahmans. Perhaps the most “secular” group, they are found throughout Kerala and Tamil Nadu and the major urban centers of India. 
Traditional settlements in Tamil Nadu: 
i. Tanjavūr area: Śrīvāñciyam, Tirukaṭaiyūr, Pālūr, Valangaiman, Tanjāvūr, 
Śēnganūr, Iṭayāṭṭukuṭi, Ālanguṭi, Tuyili, Kañcanūr, Visulūr, Vṛddhācalam, Kōnairājapuram, Avaṭaiyār koil, Tiṭṭakuṭi, Vasiṣṭhakuṭi ii. Madurai area: Vēmbattūr, Tirupparakunram, Śrīvilliputhūr. iii. Tiruchirapaḷḷi area: Tiruvaṇaikkavu, Anbil, Śrī Rangam. iv. Tirunelvēli area: Vaḷḷanāṭu, Tenkāśi, Kiḻappāvūr, Kṛṣṇāpuram, Kaṭaiyanallūr, 
Koṭṭāram, Śrīvaikunḍam, Bālamārtānḍapuram, Aḻakiyarpānḍipuram, Panaiyīr, Kāraikkuṭi, Ambāsamudram, Pāppākkuṭi v. Salem area: Tiruppattūr, Bhavāni, Cinnasalem, Nāmakkal. 
They are found in significant numbers in Kerala as well (as immigrants after ca.18th century CE): 
i. Palghat area: Koḻunthirappulli, Chembai, Mekkanamkulam, Padur, Thennilapuram, Añjumūrti, Trittamarai, Taṭirkasseri, Veḷḷinēḻi, Vēṅgassēri, 
ii. Trivandrum metro area, Karamana, Aḻakiya-pānṭi-puram, Nagar-koil area. 
142 
Like the Nambudiri Pūrvaśikhās, the Śōḻiya Pūrvaśikhās display tri-Vedic affiliations, to the Ṛg-, Yajur (Taittirīya) and Sāma (Jaiminīya) Vedas, suggesting a Śrauta praxis, attested in epigraphy till about 12th century CE. 
The group constitutes perhaps the second largest population among the Pūrvaśikhās, perhaps aroud 50,000, again perhaps a high estimate. 
1c. Vaiṣṇava Śōḻiya Brahmans. Tamil-speaking. Estimated at about 15% of the tenkalai Vaiṣṇava Brahmans. Found along the Kāvēri river around Tiruchirapally (Anbil, Śrī Rangam, Tiruveḷḷarai, Tirukōṭṭyūr, Aḻakarkoil, Puthūr) and the Tāmravarṇi river around Tirunelvēli(Tenturupperai, Āḻvārtirinagari) in Tamil Nadu. One tiny group attested in Karnataka, brought there by Rāmaānuja, in Nandidurga and Aṣṭagrāma areas, now living in Mēlkotte village. 
1d. Dīkṣitars of the great Chidambaram temple in Tamil Nāṭu. Tamil speaking and numbering around 250 families today. Only Ṛgveda (20%) and Yajurveda (Taittirīya-Baudhāyana) affiliations. 
1e. Mukkāṇi or Tirucutantirar Brahmans: Priests of the Tirucchentūr temple and found in Tirucchentūr and the old Pāṇṭian kingdom. Only Ṛgveda (80%) and Yajurveda (Taittirīya- Baudhāyana) affiliations. 
Appendix II 
Aparaśikhā Brahmans: Different Groups and Settlements: 
2a. Vaṭama. Tamil-speaking. Found all over Tamil Nadu and Kerala, with strong presence in most urban centers in India. The largest single group from all evidence. Sub-divisions [Thurston: 1907:334]: 
2.a.i. Cōḷa Dēśa; 2.a.ii. Vaṭa Dēśa; 2.a.iii. Sabhayaṛ; 2.a.iv. Iñji; 2.a.v. Tummagunḍa Drāvida. 
2b. Kēśi [or Hiraṇyakēśi]. Tamil-speaking. All ṣatyāṣāṭa Sūtra of the Taittirīya Śākhā of the Black Yajurveda. Unknown settlements, but said to be very conservative, hence to be found in Tanjāvūr and Kumbakōṇam area. 
2c. Bṛhatcaraṇam. Tamil-speaking. Found all over Tamil Nadu and Kerala, with strong presence in the major urban centers of India. The second largest group. Sub-divisions [Thurston: 1907: 336], presumably by traditional settlements: 2.c.i. Kantramāṇikka; 2.c.ii. Mīlankanūr; 2.c.iii. Mānkuṭi; 2.c.iv. Paḻavanēri; 2.c.v. Muśanāṭu; 2.c.vi. Kōḷathūr; 2.c.vii. Satyamaṅgalam; 2.c.vii. Puthūr-Drāvida. 
2.d. Vāttima. Tamil-speaking. Most numerous in Tanjāvūr. Sub-divisions [Thurston:1907:337]: 2.d.i. Patineṭṭu Grāmattu; 2.d.ii. Udayalūr; 2.d.iii. Naṇṇilam; 2.d.iv. Rāthāmaṅgalam. 
143 
2.e. Aṣṭasahasram. Tamil-speaking. Sub-divisions [Thurston: 1907, 339]: 2.e.i. Āttiyūr; 2.e.ii. Arivarpede; 2.e.iii. Nandivādi; 2.e.iv. Satkulam. 
2.f. Prathamasāki. Tamil-speaking. Vājanseyi Samhita, both the Kāṇva (majority) and Mādhyandina (distinct minority) recensions Found in Tanjāvūr area, especially in Śetanipuram. A traditional Pāṭaśāla of Śukla YV is being run Kulithalai at Vaigainallur agraharam by Sri Saranathan, financed by Sarasvatī Ammāḷ trust in Trichināpalli District. In July, 2005, there were 12 pupils, all from the Kola district, which has a large (~5000 according to Saranathan) śukla yajurvedi population. It takes him 28 months to train his students in 2086 mantras. (July, 2005) 
3. More than 90% of the Vaiṣṇava Brahmans: All vaṭakalai sect of the Śrī Vaiṣṇava Brahmans are Aparaśikhā; and close to 90% of the tenkalai sect are likewise Aparaśikhā Brahmans. 
144 
145 
146