MANTRAS BETWEEN FIRE AND WATER

In Memory of C. Hooykaas

Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen
Verhandelingen Afdeling Letterkunde, Ni euwe Reeks, D eel ,66

Mantras between Fire and Water
Reflections on a Balinese Rite

by
Frits Staal

With an Appendix hy Dick van der M ei}

North-Holland , Amsterdam /Oxford/Ncw York/Tokyo, '995

Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen
Postbus 19121, 1000 GC Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Cover: Reciting mantras, Krambitan 1987
(photo: Dick van der Meij )
Frontispiece: Dispensing the consecrated water, Krambitan 1987
(photo: Dick van der Meij )

Communicated at the meeting ofJune 12, 1995

ISBN

IV

0-444-85801-6

Contents

Preface a nd Acknowledgcments

11

III

IV
V

V II

Balinese Ritual and History
Balinese Ritual and Tex ts
Balinese Ritual, Society a nd R eligion
Ritual Structure
Tantra, Agama, Mantra a nd La ngu age

5
21

33
39

A PP EN DIX I

53

The Mudras of Id a Pada nd a Gde Agung
D ick van der Meij
APPENDIX 11

Were th e Brahmins of Southeast Asia Brahmins?
Bibliography
Index of Names

III

FIGURES AN D PL ATES

Fig. I. A ' M agnifying-Gl ass' Mudra 13
Fig. 2 . Pad and a 22
Fig. 3. Priest from Mohenjo-Daro 22
Fig. 4. Pots with brcasts used in Balinese templc cc remony
Fig. 5. Pots with breasts used in Vedic Agnicayana ritual
Plates I XVII 56 - 88 (even numbers )

22

22

V

VI

Preface and Acknowledgements

The student of Balinese ritua l faces problems that are customarily assigned
to more academ ie disciplines than a single person can handle. Team work
may be the answer but many puzzles are conceptual and in that area, at
leas t, I have tried to provide some kind of preliminary sketch. In Chapters
J- III , I attempt to disentangl e some ofthe problems with the help ofthe concepts of 'history,' 'text,' 'society ' and 'religion.' I found that the disciplines
could be kept apart on ly by forcing the issues in directions that are not necessarily the most appropriate or promising. In the fin al a na lysis, the questions seem to li e deeper than where th e answers have been sought. I offer
no solution but will brieAy indicate in wh ich direction I beli eve that soluti ons may be found .
All of this m ay sound as if I a m abo ut to present something wonderfull y
new. The truth is that my path has been paved by others more competent
in these areas of study than I shall eve r be. I am eager to record my debts
to these predecessors but, at the same time, cannot conceal why I feel th at
their work is not finish ed. I cou ld put it differently like this. I found myself
in the env iable position of D ante at the beginning of the Divine Comedy, yet
without a grand design or creative urge: in the middle of a dark forest ,
whi ch I co uld not have reached without following existing trails but from
where I could not escape since all ex its seemed to have disappeared or be
mysteriously blocked. I had to find my own way out eve n if it had not yet
been developed into a comfortable road, let a lone a n autostrada where motorized vehicles of various manufacture can move freely and at will.
I do not know Balinese or OldJavanese, and not even the a lleged ly much
simpler Bahasa Ind onesia, but have been fortunate in being provided with
excellent support, introductions, g uides a nd cri tics. My first thanks go to
the International InstituteJor Asian Studies for its Senior Schol arship which en-

VII

abled me to undertake this study, intended to be no more than a pilot project. Despite her busy schedule, Professor Haryati Soebadio provided fundamental insight as weil as essen ti al introductions to Dr. Rai Sudharta (with
whom I had lost contact although we both studied at Banaras Hindu University in the late 'fifties) and to Drs. Wayan Sutedja of the Archaeological
Museum at Bedulu. Wayan Budiastra of the Museum Bali at Denpasar,
Wayan Sepur Seriarsa, I Made Suantra and I Wayan Muliarsa of the
Bedulu Museum also assisted with epigraphy and related matters. Dr.
H.I.R. Hinzler provided helpful information and a valuable cassette with
recitations. Professor Jacob Vredenbregt and Drs. Dick van der Meij rendered much assistance and valuable information, putting their wide knowledge and extensive personal libraries at my disposal, and I was fortunate
to be in their presence in the field on important occasions. I also received
helpful information from Harold Arnold, W.P.R.A. Cappers and D.
Douwes. Professor JG. de Casparis, Mr. van der M eij, Dr. Dorothy and
Professor Burton Stein, and especially Dr. David Stuart-Fox commented
on an earlier draft of this essay. Their criticism and corrections enabled me
to finalize the present version for which I alone remain responsible. I am
grateful to them all, and especially to Mr. van der Meij for contributing

Appendix I.
I acknowledge with pleasure the assistance given by the staffs of numerous institutions and libraries in Leiden and Amsterdam, including CASA
(Center for Asian Studies, Amsterdam ), KITLV (Koninklijk Instituut voor
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde ) and, above all, the library ofthe Kern Institute at Leiden. At the stage of publication, I was assisted by the expert staff
of the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, in particular, its Edita division.
Last but not least, my sincere gratitude goes to the ritual expert upon
whose knowledge and performances al most all my direct knowledge of
Balinese ritual is based and without whom this essay could not have been
written: Ida Padanda Gde Manuaba of Padang Tegal, Ubud.
F. S.

VIII

Chapter

I

Balinese Ritual and History

Bali remains the showcase of 'Hinduism' in Indonesia and thus of 'Indianization.' India is about 3000 tim es as large as Bali but why be slaves of quantity and not conceive of India's ' Balinization'? J an Gonda would not have
thought so: he contributed to the international Handbuch der Orientalistik, of
which he was one of the editors, an authoritative Abschnitt entitl ed The Indian Religions in Pre-lrlamic Indonesia and their Survival in Bali ([975). H ermal1l1
Kulke, Professor of the History of Asia at the University of Ki el and the
scholar who has most rece ntly surveyed the state of the art, put his emphasis elsewhere. H e has a rgued that the concept of 'Indianization,' most magnificently displayed by Coedès' États hindouisés of [944 (where the term
hindouisé refers to Buddhist as weil as Hindu ), has 'perpetuated the lndoce ntric view of early Southeast Asian history ' ([990: [3). Kulke has persuasively argued that the process of state formation from Burton Stein's fertile
' nuclear areas' at the lower courses and deltas of rivers (Stein [969) started
around the middle of the first millennium in Southeast Asia as weil as in
many parts of East, Central a nd Southeast India (to which, a t a slightly later date, Southwest India may be added: Narayanan and Ve luthat [983).
One issue on which the two savants seem to disagree is subtIe: is, as the
words suggest, Hinduism Indian? And if it is, would that imply that Islam is
Arab and Christianity, Palestinian? Is there co nceptual confusion eve n if
both scholars agree on many facts, for example th at, on both sides of the
Bay of Bengal, Sanskrit inscriptions attest tha t the new kings wished it to be
known that they ruled their states according to Indian ideals and slistras?
Kulke has introduced th e term 'convergence' which is apt in many contexts. Similar ideas have been expressed before, e.g. , by Krom , a nd we shall
com e across several ex am pies in the following pages. These early statements may be outdated in other respec ts, but their basic message is uneq ui-

vocal. Here is an example from Bernet Kempers, largely but not exclusively
dealing with art, from a lecture delivered at Calcutta University in 1936 to
an Indian audience:
The Indian elements in Uavanese] culture are too numerous by far and
form so much an inseparable component of it th at it is impossible to explain them by the use of the catch-phrase 'inftuence.' Ancient Javanese
culture can only have developed as a living, organic entity, in a society
formed by a Hindu-Javanese people, th at is to say, a people th at had
come into being by the fusion of Hindus and Indonesians. The historical
foundations of th is fusion have already been shortly indicated, though
the exact manner in which it eventuaUy took pi ace can only be guessed.
In my opinion there is no reason to make a principal difference between
Indian and Indo-Javanese culture while regarding the former as the original and the latter as a mixed culture. We need but remember th at
Indian culture itself also grew and developed by the fusion of several civilizations of an entirely different character, from the times of Mohenjodaro, the Aryans or the Graeco-Buddhists tiU to-day. Can we, indeed,
imagine any culture which has not come into being by amalgamation
otherwise than one which is entirely devoid of life and progress? Instead
of awarding the monopoly of originality to one culture, while withholding it tojfrom the other, which mainly differs from it by being separated
from it by the Indian Ocean - instead of this it would be, I think, much
more correct to regard the various periods of the culture of India proper, as weU as those of Central Asia, China, Further India, Indonesia,
and so on, in which the Indian elements more or less prevailed as components of equal value forming one indivisible whole (Bernet Kempers
193]: 16- 17).
In India, much of the epigraphical evidence to which Kulke refers is concerned with land grants to brahmins; that is, grants of the royal share of
taxation and compulsory services. In Bali, land grants are not mentioned,
but a ninth century Sanskrit inscription from Trunjan (Goris 1954:
003.2b.l ) mentions payments made to brahmins and according to one of
several similar Old Javanese inscriptions from Batuan (Goris 1954:
352.3a.3 - 4), kings received taxes and made gifts to members ofseveral communities, including again brahmins.
Following Max Weber, many schol ars have written that brahmins were
invited by the chieftains or kings as ritual specialists who provided or added
extra legitimation for their newly established authority, adding prestige
and status for both rulers and the community as a whoie. This legitimation
was effected not by the advisory discourse th at local experts are in a better
position to provide, but by brahmins officiating as priests at the emerging

2

courts a nd in tempI es, performing rites de passage for th e higher strata (or
castcs) of the populati on and executing la rge r ritua ls far public or private
consumption. In K era la, bra hmins excell ed in the 'skilful blending of the
sense of obligation to the landlord and devo tion to the deity' (Na raya na n
a nd Veluth at 1983: '26 1). Summing up these findings, it is rituaL th at effected
Icgitimiza tion.
Wh at is it in ritu al tha t empowe rs it to perform sueh ex trao rdin a ry feats?
To begin with, we must a nswer the ques ti on wh at ritua l is - ta king into aceount th at there a re few things th a t have not been call ed ritua l a t som e
tim e or other (Good y 1977). I sha ll give a prclimina ry a nd rough expli cit
a nswer, enough to work with, a n a nswer th a t is a lso implicit in the following pages for I sha ll be conce rned with ri t ua l a nd not with sta te formati on
or the thesis of its lcgitim ation by ritua l means.
Ritua l consists, not onl y on both sides of th e Bay of Bengal but in South,
Southeast, C entral and Eas t Asia genera ll y - a nd probabl y else where - of
(a t leas t) two interconnec ted realms: a d oma in of acts a nd a dom a in of
sounds. Both acts a nd sounds (th e la tter genera ll y recited or chanted ) a re
exec uted or performed in stri ct accord a nce with rules. In Indi a a nd ' Indi a nized ' a reas, the first d oma in is often referred to with the help of terms
d erived from the Sa nskrit root kr- 'do, act,' such as karman o r kriyii, ' (ritu a l)
acti vity' or 'rite.' It correspond s, to som e ex tent, to th e ÓpWf.1ëVa ' (ritu a l) acti vities,' of th e a ncient Greeks. T he second d om ain consists almost excl usivel y of wha t is call ed mantra, a term tha t occurs or has equi valcnts in a lmos t a ll the la ng uages of Sou th a nd Southeast Asi a. In C hinese Taoist
ritu al, 'sound' includes more: wind , string a nd especia ll y percussion instrum ents, in addition to the cha nting, sing ing, muttering, reading a loud and
reciting, audibl y o r ina udibl y, of So uth a nd South eas t As ia (cf. Needha m
1967, Schipper a nd Staal, forth coming ). In South Asia, bell-ringing did no t
occ ur in the Vedi c but a ppears in later rites, e.g., T antri c ritual , a nd is a
common feature of ri tua l in most of C entra l a nd Southeast Asia .
In the Vedic ritua l of the las t millennium B.C. , whi ch in Indi a has bee n
preserved by bra hmins, the correlation between acts a nd m antras was system ati zed a nd m ade pa rt of th e theory of ritua l. Th e ritu a l m a nu a ls deciare th a t there is or should be a one-to-one correspondence between the
two, e.g.:

ekamantrii1Ji karmti1Ji, 'eac h act is accompani ed by (associa ted with ) one
m a ntra' (Äpastamba Srautasfltra '24· 1.44).
This principle admits of m a ny exceptions but it is of heuristic value in the
stud y of ritua l, not surprising because it was fa rmul ated by ritua l experts
who were developing a scientific tradition of a bstrac t a na lysis th a t a lso led
to linguistics. Thc two scicnces of ritu a l a nd la nguage wcre origin all y clo-

3

sely related (e.g., R enou 1941- 42) and we shall touch upon that relationship
later.
Some Vedic manuals defin e ritual as consisting of three elements: dravya,
the 'substance' of the offering or oblation, devatii the 'deity' to whom the offering is made, and tyiiga, the 'renunciation' by the ritua l patron (yajamiina )
of the offering to the deity. This characterization is more functional than
syntactic but, like the syntactic, it subdivides the ritual into clearly marked
units: the end of each unit, which consists of one offering to one deity, is
marked by the recitation of the corresponding tyiiga formula .
The hiera rchy ofVedic srauta ri tu a ls is characterized in terms of offerings:
the four simplest rituals involve offerings of milk, rice or barley; one ritual
involves the sacrifice of an animal (generally a goat); and the seven most
complex rituals involve offerings (generally called 'oblations') of Soma.

4

Chapter

IJ

Balinese Ritual and Texts

That the subdivision of ritua l into acts a nd sounds applies to Bali at least in
general terms is clea r from the literature. Acts a nd sounds are included in
the triad bayu-sabda-idep, 'action-word-thought' (Hooykaas 1966: 14), but
the subdi vision is not only theoreticalor interpretative. Hooykaas writes
aboutJane Belo's Bali: Temple Festival of 1953 in his 'complimentary' (read:
'complem entary' ) volume A Balinese Temple Festival of 1977, that Belo's
monograph:
depicts vividly the ac tions a nd responsibiliti es of the pamangku temple
priest ... but it conce rns itself with his activities rather than with what he
says. One must, howcve r, know what a priest says in order to obtain a
better understa nding of his ritua!. With th is end in view I have gradually
coll ec ted texts in the ho pc that with a sufficicnt number of them, I could
arrivc at a satisfactory compos ition of a tex t dealing with this ritu a l
(H ooykaas 1977: 1- 2).
Hooykaas is right, but the typically philological (not to say: hermeneuti cal)
obsession with tex ts - a term Hooykaas uses for his m anuscript m a teri als
and also for the scholarly contribution he intends to make - is of limited
use in th e study of ritual which is concerned not with texts but, as we have
just seen, with acts a nd so und s. The sounds of ritual a re not what thc priest
says (which is in language), but what he recites (which is in mantras). Wha t
he says a bout his ritual may be interpretative or theoretica!. In the lattcr
case, it perta ins to the rules of ritua l, which are formulated , when formulated a t a ll, in a somewhat technicalor a rtifici a l language created for insider's use: for such rul es try to ex plicate what cannot easily be explained in
langu agc. This is one of the reasons th at scientists of ritual , instead of trying

5

to give detailed descriptions, tcnd to abstract or postulate underlying rules
from which the activities may be derived or in terms of which they may be
analyzed. In so doing they discovered something more important than the
rules themselves, viz., the nature of ritual as a rule-governed activity. Within the perspective of the history of science, the Indian srauta siltras were the
first ritual manuals to explicate th at discovery and provide such rules.
These rules, which may belong to an artificial language or meta-Ianguage
(because it is about rules), may be studied through texts, unlike the ritual itself.
That acts are difficult to describe in language applies to the peeling of a
mango and even more to complex ritual or technical activity. Hooykaas is
fully aware of that fact. He writes in the Acknowledgements of his 1977 monograph: 'To describe a Balinese temple festival in words cannot do it justice
nor can a description convey the colour and fragrance of the offerings,' adding that the photographs by H.I.R. Hinzler 'give the much desired life to
this book.' Elsewhere, Hooykaas has for the same reasons made use of a variety of illustrations, especially in Hooykaas 1966 to which I shall from now
on refer as SuSe. Sounds may be studied separately with the help of sound
recordings (as have been made more recently by Hinzler), but only films
are the natural means for the depiction - and analysis - of the association
between sounds and acts that characterizes ritual.
The limitations oflanguage are also clear with respect to offerings, a feature ofVedic ritual mentioned at the end of the previous section which has
been developed to a much greater ex tent in Balinese ritual than in Indian
Vedic or even Tantric ritual. Here photographs are also needed (see, e.g.,
Stuart-Fox 1974; Brinkgreve 1993). In Bali, the making of offerings displays
more variation than the ritual itself and 'is only extremely tenuously associated with the written tradition' (Stuart-Fox 1987: page 198 of a doctoral
dissertation, unpublished except for some conclusions in Stuart-Fox 1991).
Mantras may be written down though frequently they are not because
they typically belong to the oral tradition of the ritual specialist. They are
often prohibited from being written down. Mantras, moreover, are often accented or chanted which calls for special nota ti ons, more simple in the former than in the latter case.
The needs of audio-visual methods of documentation and the inadequacy
of philology as an instrument for the study of ritual are two sides of the
same coin - a fact th at is of general and methodological significance in the
study of ritual. In the case of Balinese ritual, the limited applicability of philology has caused additional confusion because of the idiosyncracies of
Hooykaas' own important contributions to this neglected area. Gonda has
written about these in his 1979 obituary for the Royal Netherlands Academy if
Arts and Sciences from which I translate the final paragraph into English for

6

the benefit of all Dutch-Iess students of Balinese ritual who wrestle - as wrestie they must - with Hooykaas:

It could be imagined th at some readers of Hooykaas' publications might
on occasion feel irritated or inclined to critici sm on account of the form
(the unrestful typography ) of these works, the sometimes incoherent discourses and numerous digressions, the somewhat ftowery and idiosyncratic style, the allusions to personal experiences, the prese ntation of the
material in the form oftext editions accompanied by commentaries interspersed with deviations, the incomplete treatment of many topics and
problems that are embarked upon - but they should always take the following into account. Ir has been a meritorious service to collect the extensive religiousfritualliterature of Ba li which is of great cultural and historical importance and make a beginning - after the generally incidental
and always incompletc and unfinished pioneering work of others (Sylvain Levi: Sanskrit texts; McPhee: Wajang; Jane Belo: village or temple
priests, etc.) - with the systematic publication and study of its contents.
One must take into account the characteris tics of the materials themselves; the ritual texts and activities a re always presented as notes to be
used on particular occasions, certainly not as manuals pre pa red for our
benefit nor with an eye to scientific publication. One will have to value
the multifarious items of information regarding local customs and situati ons; the necessarily not always final solution to all kinds of problems
inherent in the publishcd materiais; the numerous cases where new information is provided and the results of earlier publica tions are supplemented or rectified; the extensive bibliographies and evaluations of the work
of predecessors, and last but not least, the industry and devotion that inspi red Hooykaas' work until his final day: when he died , three of his
books were already with printers or publishers (Gonda 1979: 207).
Though these words themselves are not devoid of what Sanskrit calls gaurava
'heaviness, prolixity,' and were written by a great Indologist who never did
fieldwork or even visited India, they are also wise words that we should
take to heart.
Another example of rites from Hooykaas' own materiais, also practically
impossible to describe in words, are the gestures (mudra ) of Balinese ritual.
They are typically ritual acts that are associated with sounds. Mudras occur elsewhere in dance and theatre, where films are similarly helpful, and
in iconography, where still photography suffices. The relationships between
all these kinds of mudra in South and Southeast Asia constitute an extensive field of study that has hardly bee n touched. In Balinese ritual, mudras
often follow each other in quick succession which must be kept in mind
when we study the pictures published earl ier by de Kleen and Hooykaas.

7

Hooykaas writes (SuSe 33), that even if the manuscripts may give the
impression that they are not so much concerned with mudras as with
mantras, this does not mean that 'the officiating priests do not care about
mudras.' This is supported by Appendix 1 (on pages 53 - 89 below) in which
Dick van der Meij publishes a collection of drawings of mudras made in
1941 by the grandfather of Ida Padanda Gde Manuaba who has given us
permission to publish them here. The mudras of Balinese ritual (like the Vedic, cf. Staal 1983, 11: Plates 9 - 13) refer to sound, unlike the mudras of iconography and some of the mudras of Indian dance that are symbolic or expressive (abhinaya ), and more like those of most Indonesian dances which
are 'pure dance' ( ~rrya).
Mudras illustrate graphically what philology is ill-equipped to do. Philology is at its best wh en it is concerned with well-known texts or texts about
things al ready known. When the Bible or Plato had been the subject of extensive discussion for more than two millennia, philologists could assist not
only usefully but decisively by providing a sound foundation for discussion
and analysis in the form of a reliable text. The same kind of significant reliability may be obtained in texts dealing with well-known events or familiar
entities. But when a ritual is still largely unknown, to provide variant readings from numerous manuscripts does not only fail to provide additional illumination (because there is nothing to add to ), but poses a serious obstacle
to an adequate understanding of the subject matter itself. Ritual is not a
state to be reconstructed but an activity in a developing tradition and development here means almost always: proliferation and growth. Studying variant readings of a text throws light on such proliferation but it is not studying ritual just as studying Newton's Principia is not doing physics.
In the case of Vedic ritual, we are fortunately provided with the highly
systematized auxiliary literature of the ritual siltras. And yet, that extensive
literature makes little sense unless one has witnessed such rituals or is 'gifted
with the rare virtuosity of a Caland' (Renou 1953: 34). For Indian Tantric
ritual, similar texts are being made accessible but it is the rituals themselves
th at need to be studied in the first place. With regard to Balinese rites,
Hooykaas himself, who was intermittently aware of most of these problems, is not encouraging about the materials even in the best known and allegedly most Indianized case, that of the padanda Siva priest. In that case,
the manuals clearly distinguish between the description of the rite and the
accompanying mantra in what appears to be a purely Indic manner - at
first sight, at any rate. The first kind of information may be confined to

8

titles or headings, injunc tions (vidhi)', or both; the m a ntra, which follows, is
to be recited eoncurrentl y. H ere is a simple examplc from SuSe, p. 90- 91:
Ua .NASKARA VÉ (G : namhut sekar):
ofTl hra fTl hrlfTl saJ:! k~ mufTl AfTl-UfTl-MafTl OfTl svas ti-svasti
3 k~iIi-k~riIi ya-va-Si-m a-na I-Ba-Sa -Ta -A bhütih-bhütih
4 Bhür-Bhuvalf-SvaJ:! svaha OfTl AfTl-Irl1-UfTl vYOli-mali-vya Ii-pin-nèIi
5 OfTl-OfTl I-A-KA-SA-MA-RA-LA-VA-YA-UM nama na maJ:! sva ha
6 OfTl-OfTl A-RA-KA-SA-MA-RA-LA-VA-YA-UM na ma nam a J:! sva h ä .
2

Ua CONSECRATION OF WATER. Take ajlower:
om hrä m hrlm sa J:! k~mum Am-Urn-Mam OM luck luck k ~ iIi-k~riIi
3 va-Si-to-mage-ho I-Ba-Sa-Ta-A welfare welfare
4 Ea rth-Sky-Heaven-H a il OM Am- Im- Um sky penetra ting
5 Om om I-A-KA-SA-MA-R A-LA-VA-YA-UM nama na mah sväha;
6 Om om A-RA-KA-SA-MA-RA-LA-VA-YA-UM nama namah sva hä.
2

The first paragraph is Hooykaas' edition of the original; the second hi s
trans lation. In both, th e capita li zed heading and the itali eized injunc tion
a re in Ba linese or Old-Java nese (Javano-Ba linese idi om ': Stuart-Fox 1987:
217 and elsewhere), where capit a ls or italics do not exist. Th e m a ntra imm edi a tcl y followin g consists of Sanskrit or Old-Javanese words which h ave
bee n tra nslated into English (e.g., ' lu ck, lu ck' ) or m eaningless syll ables
which h ave bee n provid ed with o r a re full y written in capita is, but the distinetion is not known to th e priest unless he knows (some ) Sanskrit. Expressions such as ya -vä-Si-ma-na ' va-Si-to-m age-ho' a re not misprints but cases
of inversion or transposition of an underlying fo rm Siväya namaOz) ' homage
to Siva' which it is safe to postul a te because it is know n from elsewhere, in
faet, a bunda ntl y.
This pa rtic ular m a ntra eould no t have com e from India since it contains
Old-Java nese (l!)iO/i -maJi-l!)iaJi-jJiri-nèri ). The rest m ay be Indi a n and the principlcs of its mantrificati on a rc unmi sta keably Indic. The similarities with
I ndi a n mantras a re often striking (' bisweil en tre ffe nd' Gonda 1970: 23). But
does it matter much whether those other parts wc re composed in Indi a ,
J ava or Bali , by a n Indi a n, J avanese or Ba linese, a bra hmin and /or T a n-

'T he I ndi a n ph ilosoph y of rilual , ( PllJ'va ) Mlm ä r!1 sä, lIses lhe lerm vidhi (which possesses
more gc ncra l m ca nings sli ch as 'o rder,' 'dcslin y' or ' [~ll e ' ) 10 rcfc r spec ifica ll y 10 thc Ved ic
' injuncli o ns' lh a l prompl rilual aCl ivil y. I do nOl know w hclh cr lhis pa ni cul a r mc a ning
has a nythin g In do Wilh lhc Sang hya ng Widhi deil y (cf". Go nda ' 9:ï2: 135, 160 and , unco nneeled , 174; 197:ï : 46 ) who has la ke n Ih c pl acc Oflhc a lmig hl y God o f co l1lemporary, ' inlclleCl uall y' inspircd Ba linese Hinduism by ro n[')f"m in g or being mad e 10 co nfo rm to lh c firsl
principl e of lhe Pa ll casil a.

9

tric, or a person of mixed parentage andfor ritual affiliation? If they we re
composed outside India (like the Old-Javanese part), the concept of 'Indianization' would apply to them if it were to apply anywhere - subject to
qualifications to which we shall return.
Entire mantras of this type, replete as they are with meaningless syllables
generally consisting of vowels or diphthongs often followed by a nasal and
called briamantra, 'seed mantra,' or dhiirm:zf (in Buddhism), can not always be
traced to Indian sources because they tend to proliferate anywhere into arbitrary variety, sometimes recursively, th at is, in accordance with rules
that apply and re-apply to their own output (with repetition as the simplest
example). One part that is not arbitrary is the emphasis on the sounds of
the syllabary (illustrated here, e.g., by the semi-vowels ra, la, va ya, and in
Appendix I , Nrs.u a- c for the vowels a, i, u and Nrs.1Il f- h for the fricatives
s, J, S, which are distinct in Sanskrit but pronounced identically in Balinese ). These features of linguistics are common in Bali as they are in India
and reAect the discoveries of the Indian grammarians. Unlike the general
proliferation of mantrification according to Indian principles, it is aspecific
instance of Indianization, found, more meaningfully than in mantras, in
the order of sounds adopted in most of the syllabaries (not 'alphabets' ) of
South and Southeast Asia, including the Korean and Japanese syllabaries
of East Asia.
Of the more than three hundred specimens published and translated in
Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971 (the only published corpus of Balinese mantras which also includes 'songs' and real texts th at may not be described as
'mantra' ), about 10% have been actually traced back, wholly or in part, to
Indian sources. However, all mantras are Indianized in the general sense
illustrated here.
Such mantras show that F.D.K. Bosch (1961 ) was right that brahmins are
more likely than k~atriyas or vaisyas to have been the major agents of Indianization (to the ex tent there was any ); but we have to add to brahmins,
(Buddhist or non-Buddhist) Tantrics, who were often ritual specialists and
may but need not have been brahmins. The contribution of Tantrics is
likely to have been more substantial than that of brahmins: for mantras of
the above type are numerous and typically Tantric. If brahmins had been
more prominent one would expect to find more Vedic mantras. As a matter
of fact , Vedic mantras are practically non-existent in Bali (cf. Levi 1933: xv
etc.) and even the beginning words of the four Vedas, found once, 'have become nearly irrecognizable' (Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 38). We shall
return to this fact and its implications in Appendix 11. (Note that I use 'Buddhist' and 'Tantric' but avoid the appellation 'Hindu' as the name of a religion, which is of nineteenth century manufacture; cf. note 3; Staal 1989 =
1993, Chapter 28A; and Bernet Kempers 193]: 5, addressing his Indian

10

audience: ' I must warn you tha t I use the name Hindu as an indication of
the Indians in general and not of th e adherents of a certain religion' ).
It would be misl eading to say of these Indianized mantras that they provide a convergenee between Indi a n and Balinese mantras, whi ch is not to say
that bits ofjavano-Balinese are not also sometim es included a long with the
'Archipelago Sanskrit' specimens th a t were certainly composed in Bali or
at least in Indonesia (Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971: 11 ) - unless these Indic m a ntras replaced earli er Balinese mantras.
The Indianization of mantras appli es in the first place to those of the padanda. It is less conspicuous in the case of the pamangku pries t whose trad itions are a lso more divergent a nd about whose ritual Hooykaas writes: 'the
'o rder' of the ritualisti c activities is rather 'free' a nd the manuals are in a
state of utter confusion' (Hooykaas 1977: I). Confusion, yes, from our point
of view, but a lso from th at of th e pamangku? Are we not seeking for a 'reliabie standard' that does not and has never existed? Variations between ritu a ls and ritual traditions exist in the case of the padanda (cf. note 14), are
greater in that of the pamangku ('even among those living in the same village,' Stuart-Fox 1987: 198) and increase furth er in the traditions of the
sengguhu, balian, etc. 1 emphasize th is not because of a valu e judgment but
because, if there is 'Indian ization' anywhere, it is in the domain of the
padanda that it must be primarily sought. I conclude that there is at least
some such Indianization, and that it pertains to mantras.
There are two kinds of padanda: the large majority (in Bali and Lombok )
are padanda Siva and a smal! number (partly located in Lombok ) are padanda Buddha. The differences betwee n the two trad itions are smal! and pertain
to ritual and mantric technicalities (Hooykaas 1973, passim; 196s: 33: 'the
hymns sung by the brahmin Bauddha pries ts in Bali, far from being purely
Buddhist, have often largely adopted Saiva admixture, if not being Saiva
through and through'; 1963: 547, 550). The two kinds of padanda officiate together during large rituals. Their difference has little or nothing to do with
the differences between Buddhism and Sa ivism as portrayed in handbooks
of religion. This is not confincd to Ba li : Tantrism obliterated many of the
pres umed differences between Saivism and Mahäyäna Buddhism, in other
parts of Southeast Asia, Nepal, Tibet and medieval India itself - a topi c to
which we return in C hapter v.
I shal! con fine myself to the padanda Siva's daily ritual known by various
na mes including Sanskrit sllrya-sevana, 's un service' or 's un worship.' This is
also the main titl e of H ooykaas 1966 monograph SuSe which is devoted lo
its description, mainly on the basis of a number of manuscripts, partly overlapping and for dealing with other topics and subd ivided into six main categories. Many of th ese manuscripts do not specify the mantras in full but
on ly refer to them by the beginning syl! ables (Hooykaas compares the expression Te Deum). In India, that practice was systematized in the Vedic ri-

11

tual sütras which were composed for specialists who had learned the Vedas
(or their relevant branches or portions) by heart (adhyaya ) before taking on
the study of their applications in ritual (prayoga).
The Sun Service starts soon after sun rise 2 and the priest faces East. In the
course of the ceremony, which lasts for about an hour, the priest prepares
'Holy Water,' called tfrtha which is as Balinese as it is Sanskrit. Afterwards
he sprinkles the water on himself, sips and washes his face and head, and
then dispenses it to his visitors, customers or clients who are lined up to receive it, first sprinkling and then pouring the water over their heads generously. These visitors had already deposited their artful!y prepared offerings,
which wil! be consecrated with the water, along with a variety of receptacles, vessels, bottles, often beer bottles (I once sawa half-gallon Burgundy
bottIe), in which the water will be poured so that they can take it home
with them. Consecrated water is also kept by the priest for later use th at
day at home or elsewhere in life-cycle, therapeutical or other ceremonies.
The importance ofholy water as a feature of Balinese ritual seems hardly
less than that of hydrogen in the universe. Hooykaas' description of Balinese religion as Ägama Tfrtha (Sanskrit: 'tradition of water' ) is therefore justified: 'the role of holy water in Balinese Hinduism is so pervasive that,
with good reason, the religion itself has at times been called Agama Tirtha'
(Stuart-Fox 198]: 173). This is so even if modernized or recently Indianized
Balinese intel!ectuals (who are not the subject of this essay, but cf. Bakker
1993) tend to insist that 'Hinduism' as an agama (which in Indonesia means
'religion' ) comprises more than only holy water - presumably because the
'Hinduism' of Bali must be closely or more closely related to the 'Hinduism' of India. However, in India itself, 'Hinduism' is hardly a meaningful
or unitary category, and certainly not anything like a 'religion' in the sense
of the three monotheisms. 3
We have seen that Hooykaas 1977 was intended as a kind of complement
to Belo 1953. No one who immerses him- or herself in Hooykaas' monograph, however, will be able to form much of an idea of what is described
in Belo's monograph. For Sürya Sevana we possess only the textual material of SuSe and no complementary information. Accordingly, when one wit-

~ The ceremony does not always start at the same time (roughly between 7 and T30 a.m.).
As a pupil of my pedanda I experienced once what Gonda said in the evening of his cat
and his students regularly found in the moming when they arrived at the OosteTs Instituut
at Utrecht after 9 a. m.: hij ;::it eTal (' he is already sitting there': Bodewi tz 1993: 14).
3' In India, the chi ef co nceptual tangle is proffered by Hinduism itself. For Hinduism does
not merely fail to be a religion ; it is not even a mea ningful unit of discourse. There is no
way to abstract a meaningful unitary notion ofHinduism from the Indian phenom ena, unless it is do ne by exclusion, following the well-wom formula: a Hindu is a n Indian who is
not aJaina, Buddhist, Parsi , Christian, Muslim, Sikh, Animist .. .' (Staal 1989 = 1993: 397).

12

nesses the rite, one sees m a ny things tha t a re not in SuSe or m ay be ex trae ted
from it onl y with difficulty. As for sequ ences th a t a re not there, it is often unclear where they would fit .
An exa mple of a sequence of rites tha t is clearly visible to a witness of the
ritua l begins, about two third s through the perform a nce, with the tying of
the iiroviJfa string a round the performer's head . This is menti oned in the
m a ntras of SuSe's subdi vision 'Ga' (P.54), where it applies to the Sivamba vessel in which the water will be prepa red, a nd a lso in th e preceding 'Summa ry' (p.36), confusingly so since the same term is applied to the head string
a few p ages la ter (p.39). Ac tu all y, §iras means 'head' a nd in the performa nces
I witnessed, the string around th e vessel had a lread y been ti ed before the
ceremony by the padanda's wife, who engages together with her husband
a nd one or more other helpers in num ero us simila r preparati ons. After tying the string, she add s Aower peta ls and 'unbl emishcd ri cc grains' (ak.fafa )
a round the rim of thc vessel in th e eig ht direc tions. H ooykaas (P.39) adds
th at a t this stage the pries t might don the black silken sas h (sampet).
Wh at the prics t does is pu t some 'unbl cmi shed ri ce gra ins' in hi s sli ghtl y
scooped Ieft ha nd , puts hi s rig ht ha nd over it a nd looks into it as if through
a m agnifying glass whilc slowly stirring the mi xture with his ri ght ringfingcr. The mudra is depicted here after Tyra de Kleen in SuSe Pla te 32,
top right (facing p.16 1), but the picture has to be turned counter-clockwise
about 30 degrees, as in Fig. I. This is a composite mudra no t included
a mong the basic form s of Appendix I.

Fig. I. A ' M agnifying-G lass' Mudra By Tyra de Klee n: SuSe Pla te 32,
top right

13

The priest then applies the rice to his forehead, tempies, chest, shoulders,
upper arms, etc. He puts on the head-string to which is tied the kalPikä,4 an
ornament composed from red and white Aower petals and green leaves and
prepared on more than one occasion (SuSe Plate 4). He then unwinds the
black sash and puts it around himself, followed by what Hooykaas calls
'OMNIA' - the marker of the end of a rite (see below, page 34).
Prior to Hooykaas' detailed, text-based description and analysis there
were no precise descriptions of the Sürya Sevana rite but only general impressions. An example from Korn 1928 = 1984, 138- 139, a little outmoded,
conveys some of the Aavour and context of the sounds and activities:
The priest, on a platform, performs the (pre)requisite ceremonies. The
mantras on his lips have a serious tone; now they are murmured softly,
then again loud and long drawn-out, sometimes muttered swiftly, sometimes pronounced slowly and solemnly. Meanwhile he holds his hands in
various positions, he rings the prayer bell, sprinkles holy water, fire and
water. 5 His whole attention is focused on the performance of his service.
And meanwhile the public th at h as called in his assistance drifts here and
there or sits in groups to talk loudly and without restraint about the
most frivolous subjects. For the ordinary Balinese there is no irreverence
in this: he has prepared the offerings according to the directions of specialists and has asked the help of the priest to bless them and dedicate them
to the gods, and with that his task is ended. It is the priest's duty to see
th at the offering and the contact with the gods are successful; the ordinary man has no understanding of such things and does not have to concern himself with them.
The second paragraph ofthis impression, which is ofimportance for the understanding of ritual and tends to astonish, scandalize or merelyescape

Ida Padanda Gde Manuaba calls the ornament kiirtikii, not kalpikii. In Bali, apparently, a
ritualist need not be a schol ar and vice versa. In India, similarly, the 'reciter of the Veda'
(vedapii!haka ) is often reviled by schol ars but it is acknowledged that the preservation of
the purity of the tradition is due to him. One reason is that ascholar, unlike areciter, may
replace a word in a mantra by a synonym : e.g., agni by vahni. But (as the Mïmarpsa specifies ), words in mantras may not be replaced by synonyms because they are not wordswith-meanings: a mantra is an indi visible unit. 'To the Vedic ritualist, it is the action which
counts, not verba I elucidation or interpretation. Of course, in India there have also been
scholars .,:, But practising ritualists pay no attention to their theories' (Staal 1989, 1993:
4

155)·
Are the last three words a misprint or does ' fire' refer to the incense burner or brazier
(dhiiPa )?

5

14

scientists with monotheistic (pa rticul a rly Protestant ) leanings, is echoed by
Hooykaas 1977: 105 in a different context:
I was told th at the proportion of padanda-s Si va seems to be diminishing in
rel a ti on to a growing populati on and certainly th is is the case with
padanda-s Buddha when compa red with the number of existing grrya Buddh a (cf. BBB.App. [which refers to H ooykaas 1973, FS] ). This does not,
however, prove a nything as regards the pamangku. H e m ay never have
bee n an intellec tu al or a theologi a n. As Clifford Geertz put it, ort hopraxis was more of hi s concern tha n orthodoxy. The mass of Balinese villagers, for whom the m aj ority of Balinese publications a re meant, since
they deal m a inl y with religion, see m to be sati sfied by being given holy
wa ter a nd do not bother themselves about how it is prepared . A Ba linese
priest is not so mu ch a leader a nd a guide, no t even a teacher, but a kind
of specialist wh ose techni cal help is invoked.
It might be added that the padanda, a fter he has prepared a nd dispensed his
holy water, m ay attend to qu es ti ons from visitors, often involving, direc tl y
or indirectl y, m atters of ritua l or the calender.
Sta tem ents like the las t one show tha t H ooykaas was more tha n the philologist he cla imed to be. His contributions a re indispensable as philology because they contain the m a ntras of the written traditi on th at are associa ted
with the rites a nd th a t are often in audibl e, especia lly during the las t two
third s of the perform ance when their recita l or muttering is a lmost a lways
accompa ni ed by the ringing of th e bell; but he was open-minded a nd this
is perhaps the ultimate reason for the chao tic impression his texts sometimes m ake:

M y approach is m a inly that of the philologist who tri es to understand his
textual m a teri a ls a nd to expla in them. During my first stay in Ba li
(Aug.'39-Dec.' 41) I was m a inly intent on learning Ba linese language a nd
procuring copies of Balinese writings, a nd during m y stud y leave
(Sept.'s8-Aug.'S9) I spent much of my tim e in collecting additiona l textua l m a teri als .. . Not being a ble to spend my Iife in my field of predilection, as before the wa r I had hoped a nd intended to do, but being handicapped by having my work a nd my study in London, I considered this
as the method for my type of work, in doing so rem aining weil aware
that there are equ all y justified but compl etely different approaches to
th e subj ect (H ooykaas 1964: 10).
One thing see ms certa in. Philology by itself cannot a nswer the ques ti ons
wheth er there were simila r Ba linese ritua ls prior to any India ni zation, a nd
if so, whether they consisted of acti vities tha t were silent or a lread y accompanied by (som e kind of) m a ntras.

15

So far we have come across a clear case ofIndianization (mantras ) and a
general domain (ritual preparation of water) which seems to be primarily
Balinese though some of its ritual forms may be Indian. Ritual purification
by sprinkling or pouring water is common in India: ex am pies range from
the Vedic (see, e.g., Staal 1983, 1:534; Tachikawa 1993: 253 - 254) to the present (e.g., udakasänti 'pacification through water' Gonda 1980: 205, 287 ). In
Vedic ritual there is a sprinkling with mantras that appears to be a substitute for sprinkling with water (äpyäyana, 'swelling the Soma stalks': Staal
1983, 1:358- 359). In Tantrism, different kinds of water occur both in the
Hindu pujä and the corresponding Buddhist rites (see Gonda 1970: 22 - 23;
Mori 1990). However, it should not be forgotten that not only washing but
also sprinkling water are universal elements of human ritual (and more
than that, as we shall see). Moreover, in Bali, there is more than washing,
sprinkling or pouring: the entire ceremony is concerned with the purification of water and its subsequent ritual uses.
Ifanything occupies a comparable position in Indian ritual it isfire (agni ).
Throughout the history of Indian ritual, it has retained that position and
spread as homa, 'fire oblation,' and often through the intermediary of Buddhism, throughout Southeast and East Asia (for Tibet, cf. Skorupski 1983;
for China and Japan, Strickmann 1983). In Japanese Shingon Buddhism,
the homa rite is still performed with similar mantras and ladles as in India
and is called goma (cf. Payne 1990). Bali has also inherited the Indian homa,
a clearer case of Indianization, though not in some of the details: but it is
rare if not peripheral (last performed in Lombok in 1931; cf. Hooykaas
198 3a ,19 8 3 b ).
The difference between fire and water as ritual or 'purificatory' agents reAect in a general manner non-ritual backgrounds, physical as weil as socia!. I shall mention a few of these in rather vague and general terms, all
standing in need of qualification. 'Physical' is not confined to the differences
between oxygen and hydrogen and all those that pertain to the chemical
compounds in which these elements function; it also pertains to geography
and climate. Vedic ritual typically originated in a cold or at least cool climate although it was preserved in hot surroundings; Balinese ritual on a tropical island, actually cooler than many parts of India. As for the social
background, Vedic ritual originated among nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists, and was preserved by wanderers although it also became part of
settled civilization. Balinese ritual belonged to a society of agriculturists
where irrigation was all important, organized by associations (subak ) and
regulated through temples (cf. Goris 1938 = 1984: 108 and Grader 1939 =
1984: 269- 288; Stuart-Fox 198J: 233 - 241 ).
Irrigation is not confined to Bali and is important in India precisely because India is drier and Aatter (with well-known exceptions). There are
more qualifications to be added but even these vague generalizations about

16

non-ritua l backgrounds seem to have been mi ssed by the few savants who
have attempted to compare Balinese a nd India n ritual. 11' we confine o urselves ta the Sürya Sevana, the two mast a utharita tive statements came
from Sylvain Levi and Haaykaas.
Sylvain Levi stated in 1933 ( IX-X , quo ted by Hoayk aas 1966: 14 1):
I I' the travelI er happens ta be admitted into th e hause ar a lacal priest, of a
pedanda as they call him, he will witness the sam e warship that is practised all aver India, a regular Sandhyä sevana; he will hea r Sanskrit m a ntras recited in th e Indian fashian, with the regul ar India n accampamment af mystic gestures, mudras.
This statem ent is carrect insofar as it refers ta mantras a nd mudras in genera l terms, but it is mi sleading. It is true that the term sandhya oceurs in Bali
(in interpreta tive ca ntexts: see, e.g., trisandhya: SuSe 137 #8 a; cf Gonda
1952: 142), but it merely refers ta 'worship a t dawn, noan and sunset.' The
G äyat rT mantra (Rigveda 3.62.10), which is the pivat of the I ndi a n sandhytivandana , was faund by Haaykaas in twa m a nusc ripts 'in a state af se riaus
mutilatian' (Goudriaan and Hoaykaas 1971: 5 19 ~ 520) . lts second päda (af
the three-päda verse) occurs at the end af the Sürya Sevana which a lsa refers ta 'Veda M a ntra GäyatrT' (Garis 1926: 44; Lev i 1933: xv; SuSe 126), but
it Dcc urs among num erous oth er fragm ents a nd is as conspicuDUS as a wart
an the tail of a n elephant.
It is tru e th a t in the Indi a n sandhyti-vandana, there is bathing and sipping
af wa ter, but the purificatian is canfined to th e rituali st himself a nd is preparatary ta aff'erings ta the sun and ather deities and secrs, with the passage
af tim e increasingly including ancestars (see Ganda 198a: 46a; Srinivasan
1973 a nd especially Einaa 1992 and 1993). There are countless ather difTerences. In th e India n rite, the bra hmin sits, ge ts up, ba thes a nd maves
araund (in Banaras, the able-badied add push-ups ). The Balinese ritua list
never moves fram his seated pasition . But these a re detail s. What Levi
missed is that the Ba linese Sürya Sevana is a ritual far the cansecrati a n ar
water, prepared by the priest in arder ta be used in his awn hausehold , dispensed to athers and jor used elsew here.
Gonda (1970: 21 ~ 24) has compa red the Ba linese Sürya Sevana with the
Indi an Sivapüjä as known from Southeas t Indian Ägama texts published
by H élène Brunner (-Lachaux ) and others. Hooykaas had a lready made
use af same a f th ese publications in his 'Comparison of Saiva Ritua l in
Sauth Indi a a nd Bali ' (SuSe Ch.lv ) a nd we sha ll return ta them. Fallawing
Haaykaas' SuSe, Gonda enum erates similarities (mainly pertaining ta m a ntras) and dissimilariti es (mainly pertaining to the preparatian and uses af
water) but he does not arrive at a definite eonclusion. Wh en he brieAy discusses the general situatian an Bali, he writes about ' the rem a rkable mix-

17

ture' (das merkwürdige Gemiseh) of Indian, Javanese and Balinese elements.
This sounds more like 'convergence' than 'Indianization,' but I believe that
we are justified in going a little further: the Balinese Sürya Sevana is basically a Balinese water ritual enriched with and immersed in Indian elements, especially mantras. This is supported by Gonda's subsequent (1975:
51 - 52) references to holy water in pre-lslamicJava and is not confined to
Indonesia. In Thailand, Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn continues to inaugurate buildings by sprinkling holy water.
That Levi, on his briefvisit, exuded knowledge rat her than using his eyes
is not entirely surprising, but that the author of Agama Trrtha is similarly
misleading, is nothing short of astounding. In his 'Comparison,' Hooykaas
does not fail to mention 'Holy Water' a couple of times when enumerating
'constituents of the Balinese ritual which are either absent in South India
or are much less developed' (Hooykaas 1966: 152 - 153), but he does not
state explicitly th at the entire ceremony of Sürya Sevana is concerned with
the ritual preparation of water in contradistinction to any Indian ritual of
comparable importance. This is the more surprising since Hooykaas is, as a
matter of course, weil aware of the fact th at many other ritual specialists in
Bali consecrate water and use it in similar and dissimilar ways and in a
great variety of contexts.
In one passage (1964: 37), Hooykaas seems to explicitly contradict the exclusive importance I am assigning here to water in Balinese ritual:
Whether one examines the Saiva priest's ritual at home or in public, in
temple or in graveyard, directed mainly in adoration of the godly
powers or mainly in averting the evil powers - fire and water, water and
fire, are the dominating powers.
Perhaps they are, but we should read carefully and look at the context. I am
claiming th at the Sürya Sevana is primarily concerned with the preparation of water like several other Balinese ceremonies. Hooykaas refers to
many other rituals and contexts, including the homa fire ritual already mentioned, but he is mainly concerned with texts and mantras (the above passage occurs in an Appendix on 'Mystical Syllabies' ). In texts and mantras,
everything under the sun is mentioned or recited, including the sun itself.
In the mantras of the sun service, in addition to Sürya and Agni, many
other names of powers and deities occur. The recitation or invocation of
Agni is not arbitrary: it often accompanies the ritual use of dh71Pa, 'incense.'
That does not mean th at the sun service is, even in part, a fire ritual, just
as the fact th at a piece of the GäyatrI mantra occurs at its tail-end does not
imply that it corresponds to the Indian sandhya-vandana.
What are the reasons for Hooykaas' lack of clarity on th is central issue? Is
it respect for Levi's authority to which he obliquely refers when writing: ' I,

18

who perforce residc in the outskirts of London, have not witnessed 'worship
as it is practised a ll over Indi a"? Unlike ly, for Hooyk aas 1963: 545, note 2
and 1966: 11 - 12 givcs bala nced but critical evalu ations of Levi's contribution. Is it the rather limited selection of second a ry li terature on South Indian Saivism 6 which he uses in hi s comparison? Is it the philologist's characteristic in a bility, if not to see the forcs t for the trees, at least to show it to
others?
There may be som e truth to a ll of th ese, but the rcal rcason is th at texts
do not o nly fail to charac terizc thc uni verse but a rc a lso insufficicnt as
mcans for thc study of human civili zation.

(; I mysclf a m rcspons ible for thc s ug~cs ti o n that H ooy kaas ta ke a look a t Di ehl 1956 (see
Hooykaas 1964: 17) whi ch is less rcli a ble th a n thc Iwo slIbscquentl y Pllblishcd books he
lIsed (Bh a ll 1961 a nd Brunncr-Lac hallx 1963). When H ooy kaas wond ers (1966: 145) why
Dichl pays so mllch morc a tl clllion 10 preparations a nd abllltio ns than 10 Ih c ri l lla l ilself,
a ll o nc ca n say is: so mll ch lh c worse lo r Oie hl.

19

Chapter

III

Balinese Ritual, Society and Religion

So fa r we have found a clea r case of Indi a ni zati on in ma ntras. The Sürya
Sevana looks like a purely Ba linese ce remony, with I ndi a niza ti on and convergence a ffecting several de ta ils. Once we enter the a l mos t indefinite variety of ritua l deta il, each ease has to be considered on its own merits. At the
prese nt sta te of our knowiedge, whi ch is very limited, convergence rem a ins
a poss ibility in the m aj ority of cases; there are onl y a few where we can
clea rl y detect Indi ani zati on. I have a l ready referred to bells a nd mudra gestures. T he squ a re ' paviiion' or bale jJa -veda-an, where the pri est performs his
ce remoni es, is (as its name sugges ts) a nother Iikcly case of converge nce: it
is probably indigenous (cr Swell engrebel 1984: 29) but also reminisce nt of
th e Indi a n maTJrjapa, whieh m ay be pa rt of th e templc or occ ur by itself. In
such cases, we m ay have neither Indi a niz ati on nor co nverge nce but pa ra llel devclopment.
H ooykaas' genera l compa riso n be twee n Sou th Indi a n a nd Ba linese Saiva
ritu a l (SuSe PP.1 41 sq. , to which we return in C hapter v ) requires some qu ali fica ti on. Foll owing hi s sources, whi ch a re no t im peccablc (cf. no te 6),
H ooykaas correc tl y draws (PP.154 - 155) a co ntrast be twee n, on the one
hand , the padanda's ritua l, independent fro m the templ e ritua l or large r ce remoni es in whi ch it pl ays its importa nt role; a nd on the oth er, the lndi an
te mpl e ritua l. But the contras t is a ppa rent, for lndi a n domes tic rites a nd
m a ny o thers (including th e rites of asce tics and oth er renounce rs) a re a lso
independent from the tempIe. Tho ug h the padanda's ritual is certa inl y no t
Vedic, as we have just see n, the Vedi c domesti c ritua l of bra hmins is called
gr!rya, 'domestic,' from grlza, ' house,' and the same word , griya, is used in Ba li
to refer to thc padanda's hom e.
Convergences are of various degrees. T he touehing of different pa rts of
the body, th e Ta ntric nyasa, occ urred a lread y in th e Vedic domesti c ritu a l

21

Fig.

2.

Padanda

Fig. 3. Priest from Mohenjo-Daro

Fig. 4. Pots with breasts used in Balinese temple ceremony

Fig. 5 Pots with breasts used in Vedic Agnicayana ritual

22

and is a lso found in other cultures, in a great variety of forms. It is connec ted with joint marks th at are found a ll over the world and go back at
leas t to the Neolithic period (sec, e.g. , Schuster and Carpenter 1986: VO!.I ,
Book 3, Ch·IT 775 - 861 ). It is obvious that touching different spots of the
body, especia ll Y with water, is not very different from washing. All humans
do not engage in that practice to th e same extent , but it is not confined to
humans as is demonstrated by one of our close associates in the animal
world: the cat.
When th e priest of a Sou th I ndian Vip:zu templc com es out from the inner
shrine a fter performing his p1ljti, he not only sprinkles the devotees with
water, but they receive it (in their right hand ), sip it and wet their face,
head and hair in a simila r manner as Balinese recipients do with the lfrl/za
of their Saivite padanda (which they receive in both hands). In South India th is water is often called Vi~I;1utIrtham and is associated with the
'waters' in which Vi ~ I;1u li es between creations, but it m ay be connected
with Siva and pi aces of pilgrimage are call ed lfrl/za even if they are not on
the banks or conAuences of rivers, lakes or other watery spots or regions.
Moreover, the pri est com es out of th e inner sanctum with burning camphor a nd peoplc hold their hands over it and move it back to th eir eyes in
the same manner as the padanda does in Ba li . These are Tantric or Agamie
but not esoterie rites: modern visitors to Sou th India temples cannot miss
them a nd Indon esian visitors would not have fail ed to do so in the past
when these rites were probably the same (for their Buddhist counterparts,
see Mori 1990). In such cases, Indianiza tion is more likely than convergence even if the idea of purification through water or fire is universa!.
The firo vi~ja head-string, with the kalpikti attached to it (a bove, page 14),
does not seem to occur in India and ce rtainly not in the sand/zyti-vandana;
until one goes back a few thousand years a nd meets it on the famous priest
figure from Moh erûo-Daro who has a st ring a round his head with a simila r
orna ment, ofsim ilar size, ti ed to it. See Figure 2 (detail from SuSe pla te 10)
a nd Figure 3 (from Wheeler 1968).
Other types of illustration for likely convergences com e from material
culture. Pots wit h breas ts, for example, a re common in Sou th Asia from
the Vedic peri ad and not rare in Bali where the breasts are more numerous. This is more likely a case of convergcnce than Indi an ization. See Figure 4 (from Hooykaas-van L ee uwen Boomkamp 1961 : plates 75 - 79) and
Figure 5 (author's photograph; see a lso Staal 1983, I: plates 27, 3 1, 67, 83)·
Domes tic ritual on bath sides of the Bay of Bengal and a ll over the globe
is, by definition , conce rned with Iife cycles or rites-of-passage. People are
bom and die eve rywhere and m a rry in most places a nd a ll such eve nts are
surrounded by ritua!. But all life-cycles are not universa!. Tooth-filing is
more Balinese (and Indonesia n) than Indi a n and name-giving ritua ls are,
at least in special cases, more developed on the Balinese side (Hinzler

23

1988). Dying is often related to a ncestors and ancestral rites appear to be - if
I may venture a n awesome generalization - more developed in Southeast
than in South Asia. Whatever the percentages, there is a telling contrast: Indonesia is known for burials a nd India for cremation. But isn't cremation
the most spectacular of all Balinese ceremonies? The larger South and
Southeast Asian contex t suggests, as we shall see, that the idea is Indian
but its execution, though a lso found in Burma and Thailand, largely Balinese. 7
That the picture becomes more complicated is not surprising and accords
with the terms used by de Casparis (1983 quoted by Kulke 1990: 14, 28):
'The relatively simpie, or perhaps simplistic, view of Indianization is replaced by a complicated network of relations.' We must a lso speculate, rationally, for how can we try to visualize the situation on Bali prior to Indianization? Were the dead buried without cremation? This question runs
para llel with our ea rlier one: were there a ncient water purification rituals
perform ed without ma ntras? It is now known, or likely, that some padanda
rites developed from form er pamangku ritua ls (Stua rt-Fox 1987: 251). But we
need to go further and solutions to these questions, even tentative ones, will
have to ta ke into account regions beyond Bali.
That is where they were sought, in the case of cremation, by the au thor of
the first tex tual study of the Balinese death ritual th at moved beyond texts,
K.c. Crucq's dissertation of 1928, Bijdrage tot de kennis van het Balisch doodenritueel ('Contribution to the knowledge of Balinese funeral ritual' ). Crucq's
study is based upon manuscripts and published materials including accounts from India, other parts of Indonesia and the apparently more traditional Bali-aga, about whom we should recall th at their unity is 'a purely negative one, that of being non-Javanized Hindu Balinese' (Goris 1929 =
1984: 294). The distinction between directly-Indianized and Indianizedvia-Java does not concern us in the present context, but the point to be reta ined is that, from the historical point of view, the Bali-aga, though it need
not be, might very weIl have been Indianized.
Crucq mainta ins that funeral rites are the most invaria ble elements of a
culture (' het doodenceremo nieel verandert overal het minst van het gehele
cultuur-complex van een volk') but found in Bali a picture of terrible confusion and uncertainty ('een beeld van hopelooze verwarring en onzekerheid': pp.110- I). H e refers, in particular, to the fact that the Balinese first
7 Gonda writes about the 'remarkabIe feat ures of th e crema ti on ceremonies' that they are
' widely different from the Indian fun era l rites' (quoted in Bakker (993 ). Swelleng rebel's
en um era tion (1984: 29 - 30) is mislead ing on th is point, as on other 'cultura l elements of
Hindu or Hind u-Javanese orig in' (e.g., ' th e centra l a uth ority of the rul er, a nd his position
as representative of the divine forces ' - contrast Kulke 1990 - and ' the Brahmin padanda
and his ritu a l' ).

24

bury their dead and later dig up the remains again in order to cremate
them . It has been m a intained that this practice is due to financial reasons:
since crem ations are ex pensive, it is cheaper to cremate many people at the
same time, but since they do not obligingly die simultaneously, each is first
buried separately and temporarily and all are later cremated together.
Crucq points out, however, that princes and ot her aristocrats are also often
buried before they are cremated and so saving money cannot be the reason
('de kosten der verbranding kunnen natuurlijk niet de reden zijn' ). Crucq
concludes that the Balinese originally buried their dead as is still done by
the BaLi-aga and elsewhere in Indonesia (p.114), and that the Indian method of cremation was added later. According to him, most of the funeral
rites ('verreweg het grootste deel van het gehele ritueel' ) are non-Indian
(p.121 ).
Crucq's conclusions have been generally accepted (cf. Gonda in note 7)
and are in accordance with what others found , e.g., Stutterheim 1931: 12:
Meanwhile it has become clear that the entombing of oldJavanese kings
was not a Hinduistic practicc grown in course of time more and more Indonesian, but a thoroughly Indonesian ceremony, which on Java and
Bali took a Hinduistic form and should be considered as a higher form of
the analogous ceremonies of the Dayaks and other Indonesian peoples
not inAuenced by the Hindus.
What Stutterheim formulates here is a kind of convergence, not Indi a nization. More information is nowadays available about ancient burials in
Indonesia and Southeast Asia generally. For Bali, we have excavations by
H. R . van H eekeren (e.g., van H eekeren 1955) and R. P. Soejono (e.g., Soejono 1969), not only of some 100 prehistorie burial sites from Gilimanuk (at
the Western tip of Bali , just across the Bali Strait from East Java ), but of
large stone sarcophagi, '53 from 37 different sites' (Bernet K empers
1991: 13 - 14; spectacular specimens are on display at the Archaeological
Museum at Bedulu ).
Hooykaas has pointed out (1964: 6) that Crucq might have added some
500% to his textual materials if he had consulted a manuscript in the L eiden library on Buddhist Balinese death ritual, described by Juynboll in his
1907 Supplement to the Leiden Manuscript Catalogue. It would, no doubt,
have introduced great opacity into Crucq's slim volume. But Hooykaas
also adds, significantly, that JuynboIl's description mentioned th at the funeral rites are call ed tiwa, a term that is obviously 'related with the Dayak

tiwah.'
Here we arrive on firm er ground for the Dayak tiwah rites are among the
world's best described funeral rites as anthropologists know from Hans
Schärer's Der Totenkult der Ngadju Dajak in Süd-Borneo of 1966, especially

25

Volume II Handlungen und Texte zurn Totenkult. Interestingly, the publication of
these two large volumes by the KITLV was partly financed by Hooykaas
(not a wealthy man ) as the Preface informs us. But there is more to it.
Schärer was a missionary who lived for seven years in Kalimantan, making copious notes (in some 800 copy-books) chiefly from wh at he was told
by informants, especially ritual experts who dictated the chants that accompany their rites and the ritual injunctions that specify how acts and chants
are combi ned. Schärer painstakingly collected these materiais, transcribed
the originals and made translations which he checked again with the same
and other informants. Subsequently he went to Leiden, studied anthropology withJP.B. deJosselin deJong and became more widely known through
his Leiden dissertation published in 1946 with the title Die Gottesidee der
Ngadju Dajak in Süd-Borneo. Schärer returned to Kalimantan once more
but died there soon (in 1947). In due course his book was translated into
English by another weil known anthropologist who was interested in the
Dayaks, Rodney Needham, under the title Ngaju Religion. The Conception of
God arnong a South Borneo people (1963 ).
In the Priface to this English edition, de Josselin de Jong is surprisingly
ambiguous about the contribution of the study of anthropology to
Schärer's work. On the one hand, he writes that Schärer, on his second visit, returned ' this time with the backing of sound scholarly method and theory' although 'it was never granted to Schärer, with his self-acquired insight,
to pursue his studies on religion in Borneo as a trained anthropologist; it is
likely the result would have been work of inestimable value.' On the other
hand, he acknowledges 'a remarkable thing,' i.e., 'that much of Schärer's interpretation of Ngaju religion was not due to his anthropological training,
but had already developed during the years of close and continued contact
with the Ngaju, before he made the acquaintance of academic anthropology' (pages v and VI ). Note that de Josselin de Jong refers to 'interpretation
of the religion' and mentions neither the editions of originals nor their translations - i.e., the bulk and most valuable part of Schärer's work.
Ifwe take a look at the books themselves we re ad in Schärer 1963 (P.35)
that 'the conception of God is the focal point of Dayak culture, by which
everything is defined and to which everything is referred ... the social and
economic aspects of this sacred contest must also be seen and interpreted
in relation to it'; in other words, a straightforward expression of the missionary faith , apparently unchecked by anthropology. 'Social and economic aspects' are mentioned, but they are interpreted in terms of a 'sacred con test,'
i. e. , in theological terms. The ethnocentricity of Schärer's views may have
been elicited by the influential opinion of the nineteenth century linguist
A. Hardeland, au thor of a Dayak grammar and dictionary, according to
whom the highest divinity ofthe Dayaks is a shadowy being devoid ofsignificance - a view consistent with much of Schärer's own materials as J van

26

Baal sagaciousl y rema rked (1947- 1948: 94). IfSchärer's statement a bout the
importa nce of the conce pt of God were correct, the D ayaks would be unique among the tribal a nd oral cultures of th e world , vying with Ikhna ton
for the honour o f being monotheists no t onl y avant but a lso sans La LeUre.
Such sta tem ents mig ht have earned their a u thor a d oc tor's degree (rom
ViCI1I1a'S Fa ther Wilhelm Schmidt in th e 'twenti es or 'thirties rather tha n
Leiden's de J osselin de J ong in the 'fourti es.
In the Introduction to th e 1966 volumes we read something different: 'We
lea rned tha t if we wished to get to know th e D aya k religion better, wc
must first of a ll know th e fun era l cult whi ch is one of th e mos t importa nt features of the religious, economical a nd socia l life of the D ayaks' (1966,
I:S3).R To som eone famili a r with ora l a nd tri bal cultures, especia ll y of Indonesia, tha t sta tement rings more truc th a n the credo o f 1946.
It is a n undisputed fac t (which H ooykaas must have grasped a t once ),
tha t th e editi ons a nd transla ti ons of 1966, which a re direc tly based upon
some of the No tebooks, a re no t o nl y of much greater value th a n the statem ents of the di ssertation (a lthough th e la tter a lso conta in valu a ble No tebook
m a teri a l), but bea r a n a lmost unca nny resembl a nce to lndia n ritu a l manuals. Schä rer, appa rentl y, was a rat her unusual mi ssiona ry. H e never a band oned the faith in his mi ssion, but he was a ca reful recorder of w ha t he saw
a nd especia ll y m eti culo us with regard to the songs and th e accompa nying
explanati ons of their ritu a l use th a t we re dicta ted to him. To m a ny anthropologists, most of these extensive ma teri a ls m ay appea r rather deta il ed a nd
specia li zed; they look like th e fi eld notes from which 'anthropological th eory' has to be di still cd. But Schä rer's notes we re no t field notes; they were meti cul ous recordings of songs a nd their ritu a l uses, as ca reful as a re some of
th e best of the philologist's critica I editi ons a nd tra nsla tions. Schä rer, howeve r, had e1 ected to stud y a nthropology, not philology or linguistics. When
he was pressed to conform to 'academi c anthropology' and 'th eory,' what
he did , a ppa rentl y, was ge nera lize a nd spec ul a te a long the Iines of hi s missionary background a nd edu cation with results th a t were predictabI e a nd
uninform a ti ve insofa r as they we re not a lso mislcading. The result was different from the picture th at a ri ses from his N otebooks.
H ere is a n examplc from the N otebooks themse lves:
T he chicfbali an kee ps th e vessel with the sprinkling ri ce in his ha nd s a nd
burns some garo or m a ~ a n in order to fumi gate the sprinkling n ce,
whil e saying:

sa hcn d ass wir, wollten wir die Reli gio n d er O,~ak et was nä her ke nnen lern en, vor a llem d en To tenkult kenn en 11111Ss ten , d er eine d er wi chtigs ten Ersc heinllnge n d es reli giösen ,
oe ko nomi sc hen und sozia len Lebens der Oaj a k is!.

R W ir

27

I smoke you, 0 rice, with golden incense, which may attract the hornbill
with its aromatic, like the aroma of women that causes the water snake
to emerge from the waters, so th at your soul will become clairvoyant
and clear until it arrives at the village of the Sangiang (Schärer 1966,
11:45 1).9
Before we pi ace this in context, we should take into account that the description ofthe rite (the first paragraph) is in the Ngaju language, but the recitation itself (the second paragraph) in a special language, about which
Schärer writes:
The Basa Sangiang was, according to the Ngaju Dayak, the originallanguage ... the language still used in the ritual, from which ordinary Ngaju
is a degeneration ... Actually, most words of the Basa Sangiang are
formed by making changes in existing words or by affixation of syllables
in front or at the end (Wortumformungen ader Anfügung van Vor- und Nachsilben: Schärer 1966, 1:7- 8).
What Schärer refers to here may be called, in Indian terms: mantrification.
As it happens, the earliest Sanskrit inscription in Indonesia comes from Kalimantan (Kutei ) - but were these Dayak ceremonies subject to Indianization?
Since we are back in some kind of philology, albeit oral philology, what
about the philologist's 'variant readings'? Schärer is very definite about
them. After referring to Hardeland's statement th at different Balians sing
different songs, he writes:
That continues to be true and we cannot, of course, collect all versions
and then construct a pure text. That is neither possible nor necessary. Despite many differences, the principal parts, which are essential, remain
unaffected since any arbitrary touch or change of these most important
parts would not only take away the effect of the songs and therefore of
the entire activity, but would also bear serious consequences for the

Der Hauptbalian hält nun das Gefass, das den Streureis enthält, in seinen Händen und er
verbrennt etwas Garo oder Manjan, urn damit das Gefass des Streureises zu beräuehern, indem er dabei sprieht:
9

leh beräuehere dieh, 0 Reis, mit goldenem Weihraueh, welcher anzuloeken vermag den
Nashornvogel, mit duftendem Räueherwerk, das wie ein Wohlgerueh ist, der von Frauen
ausgeht und der zum Auftauehen bringt die Wassersehlange, auf dass deine Seele weitsiehtig und helle werde, bis sie angekommen ist im Dorfe des Sangiang.

28

priests and priestesses (Basir and Balian), be it sudden illness or impending death (1966, 1:5).10
Oayak orally transmitted ritual manuals are strikingly similar to Indian
and Balinese ritual literature, a similarity that includes the uses of a metalanguage of rules which is different from the artificial mantra-Ianguage of
songs. In the example from the Sürya Sevana quoted earlier (above, page
9), the words 'take a Aower' are in Old-Javanese, and the mantras are in
Sanskrit, Javano-Balinese or meaningless in the Indian mantric manner
just as the Oayak 'injunction' is in the ordinary Ngaju language and the
'mantra' in the Basa Sangiang. Oayak 'mantras' are more similar to the Vedic than to the Balinese-Tantric variety as in the following illustration from
the beginning of the Vedic Agnicayana ritual, where the first paragraph
comes from Baudhäyana Srauta Sütra 10.6 (translated by Ikari and Arnold
in Staal 1983, n: 495) and refers (by their beginning words ) to the mantras
(from Taittirlya Sarphita 4.1.6.la in Staal 1983, I: 298) that follow in the second paragraph:
H e (the Adhvaryu priest) prepares twenty-one balls of stallion dung, a
hoe, fire, and fuel for firing. Then he lights the horse dung and fumigates
the main ukha (pot ) with (seven mantras) starting with:
May the Vasus make you smoke with the Gayatrl meter
in the fashion of the Ailgirases!
May the Rudras make you smoke with the Tri~çubh meter
in the fashion of the Ailgirases!
May the Ädityas make you smoke with theJagatï meter
in the fashion of the Ailgirases!

I believe that we may conclude that the Balinese ritual as we know it replete
with Indic mantras, is the successor to a similar Balinese ritual in which
the mantras were not Indic, just as the Oayak recitations are not Indic
even though they are in a mantra-like language. In other words, what looks
like an Indian ritual, or a highly Indianized ritual , transported to Bali, is,
in fact, a result of some degree of ritual convergence. Only the mantras, pos-

JU Wir können na türli ch nicht a lle Versionen sarnrneln und dann einen sa uberen Text herstellen. Das ist weder rnöglich noch notwendig. Trotz rnan chen Verschiedenheiten blei ben
die prinzipiellen Teile, urn di e es ge ht, un a ngetastet, weil j edc willkürliche Antastung oder
Veränderung dieser wichtigsten Teile di e Gesänge, und d a rnit di e ganze Handlung, nicht
nur unwirksarn rnachen würde, sondern auch für di e Prieste r und Priesterinnen (Basir
und Balian ) sehr schwere Folgen hatte, sei es plötzliche Erkrankung ader rasch eintrctender Tod .' Note th e prepond erance of songs ('Gesänge' ) over activity (' Handlung' ).

29

sibly some mudras and other details of the rites, are Indic. That the picture
has th us become more complex - even without taking into account that
some padanda rituals may originally have been pamangku rituals - is not surprising and in accordance with de Casparis' formula, already quoted, of 'a
complicated network of relations.'
The use of mantra-like language, songs or formulas is not confined to the
Dayaks and allegedly Indianized peoples. It has been widely reported from
Southeast Asia an elsewhere. A particularly instructive therapeutic case
from Halmahera 'magicfmediçine' is described by Taylor (1988) who refers
to other studies on Thailand (by L. Golomb) and Malay magic (by K.
Endicott, j.D. Gimlette, S. Howell and W.W. Skeat). Taylor contrasts his
materials with 'HindufBuddhist mantras' but his information on the latter
should be used with caution and the contrast is more apparent than real. It
seems likely that the mantra-like expressions of Indonesia are related to the
paired ritual language of Eastern Indonesia to which j.j. Fox (1988) and
others have called attention, but I must leave it to Indonesia specialists to
pursue this further.
I have concentrated on the second volume of Schärer 1966, the one that
deals with ritual, not on the first, which deals with myths because my subject is ritual. But doesn't ritual stand in need of an explanation and reflect
myths? It does stand in need of an explanation but it does not, or only
rarely, reflect myths. To think so is itself a very persistent myth, discussed
ad nauseam since the nineteenth century (cf. Staal 1989, especially Chapter
13). It is dear th at Schärer subscribed to th at myth at least intermittently
which is not surprising for it used to be fashionable especially among scholars of religion. Some of his materials could be quoted in support of it
though other parts support the opposite view th at rituals are independent
of myths and myths are rationalizations of rites (as in the Balinese case discussed by Stuart-Fox, below page 37- 38).
The emphasis on the creation myth in Schärer 1946, which has largely
(though not entirely) disappeared from Schärer 1966, is almost always a direct reflection of monotheistic projections. I cannot judge the Dayak case
(where Vredenbregt 1981: 25 follows Schärer though he regards myths of
creation primarily as 'social facts' ), but in the case of the Indian Vedas, for
example, the emphasis in many modern publications on the so-called 'creation myth' of the Rigveda (10.90), which also introduces for the first time
the names of the four castes, is doubtless unwarranted. This poem, actually
a hymn to a cosmic man, is an atypical, late and isolated composition. It is
an important myth, no doubt, but so are hundreds of others. In monotheism, creation is fundamental, which is the sole reason that missionaries
and some anthropologists continue to look for creation myths.
The same holds for Bali, with a few exceptions. The first sentence of the
first Sanskrit text from Bali published by Levi has Sanskrit srieya 'may I

30

create (ofE pring ),' followed by a n enum eration of things th a t 'are born'
(jiiyate; better Ba linese versions in SuSe 176- 177). Simila rly, in hi s extensive
description a nd a na lysis of the temples a nd ritua ls of Besa kih, Stua rt-Fox
(1987) m enti ons once, in a n Appendix (E: 5 11 - 5 15), a ritua l di a logue where
the question 'W ha t is it yo u do?' is a nswered by ' I m a kefcreate (akarya ) the
earth, the mounta in,' which is foll owed by a n enum era ti on of their contents. Both appear to be a typical. The tex t published first by Lev i is not a
basic text, like Genesis, but a lita ny chanted on new a nd full moon days a nd
accompa nying some of the rites. T he di alogue of Stua rt-Fox's Appendix occurs in rite #1 I in the sequence of ri tua l cvents of the Bha ta ra Turun K abeh whi ch last over a period of a lm os t a month if a nd when they are performed .
1 have not been able to find a single reference to creation in H ooykaas'
writings. SuSe (page 145) inform s us that the Sanskrit term for crea tion,
sr~!i, occurs neither in Ba linese ritu a l nor e1sew here in Ind onesia. Wh a t
about H ooykaas 1974 where the term 'creati on' has m ade it into the titJ e:
'Cosmogony a nd C reation in Ba linese T raditi on'? The book was published ,
like Schärer's volumes, by the Koninklijk Instituut voor Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde (KITLV), known l'or its Calvinist background a nd leanings. Did a sy mpa thetic editor perh aps help with the titJ e, which might appeal to a wider
audience, certa inly in the Ne therl a nds, with the word 'C reati on' added? 1
doubt it, for sales have never been - a nd should not be - a n importa nt considera tion in scientific publicati on.
Despite its titJ e, the reader of H ooykaas Ig74 will find much about cosmogony a nd no thing a bout creati on in th at book. The veil of contradiction
betwee n titJ e a nd contents is pa rtl y lifted wh en we a rrive a t the ' Fina l
Word' (page 171) a nd read : ' I considered using for th is book the titJ e
'Synthesis of Macrocosm a nd Microcosm,' but dropped the idea since I preferred the na rra ti ve to the philosophical approach.' 1 cannot teil - as is
often the case - what exactl y was in H ooykaas' mind . Did he simply want
to stay away from theological quibbles (cf. his objec ti on to G eertz' use of
th e term ' theology' disc ussed in Staal 1989: 338 - 339)?
Wheth er or not Ba li origin all y possessed a 'reli gion' whi ch changed along
with the m a ntras, the ritua l seems to have rem a ined the same. I conclude
tha t Balinese ritua l is a classic case of a ritua l without religion. This m ay
seem puzzling when we difine religion a long th e lines of Jud aism, Christi anity and Isla m, a nd note tha t these three a lso comprise ritua l features
which, therefore, seem to be features of religio n. But in m a ny pa rts of Asia,
where ritual is much more wides pread a nd developed tha n in the th ree
monotheisms, tha t concept of religion is not o r not easil y applicable. It is a
monotheistic proj ection th at bac kfires because th e Asian situation throws
light, in the opposite directi on, on the mono theistic concept of ritua l itself:

31

for if A ('ritual' ) invariably co-occurs with both Band non-B, it cannot be a
feature of B ('religion' ).
That the monotheistic concept of religion cannot be used in most parts of
Asia is consistent with the fact that, outside the three monotheisms, none of
these so-called religions are based upon an authoritative sacred book. The
Vedas are repositories ofmantras and the other traditions have produced innumerable orally composed or written compositions and texts but none
that are considered authoritative. All are not only constantly being re-interpreted, but also revised, modified, transformed and added t~. To begin a
section on the 'religion' of a village community in Bali with a chapter on
De heilige schrift en de verhouding van mensch tot God ('The Holy Writ and the relation of Man to God' ), as did Kom in his 1933 monograph on Tnganan Pagringsingan, is therefore misleading.
That the monotheistic concept of religion cannot be used to characterize
the familiar Chinese rubric of the 'Three Teachings' is becoming widely
known. In East or Southeast Asia, there are no indigenous religions and in
Sou th Asia, there are none until we come to the bhakti movements of medieval India. In sum, the rituals of South, Southeast and East Asia are rituals
without religion.
I cannot establish this general thesis in its full generality in the present
context, but it was the natural (albeit unexpected ) outcome of Staal 1983,
Volume I, with respect to South Asia, was formulated as such in the Preface
of Volume II, substantiated and widened by other contributions in that
volume and further discussed elsewhere, especially in Staal 1989. The idea
of ritual as a specialized science or technique with a biological background
rather than a feature of society or religion is in full accordance with the observations on Balinese ritual performances by Kom and Hooykaas quoted
earlier (above page 14- 15).

32

Chapter

IV

Ritual Structure

Whatever the conceptua l status of ritua l, it would not be difficult to show
tha t most of the ritua ls of South, Southeast a nd East Asia a re structurally
similar. It would not be difficult but tim e-consuming a nd is best left to the
future w hen ritua ls will be forma lized and computers can do (part of)
the job. Formalization would require a mu ch more thorough analysis than
can be given in the present context; but the genera l outlin es are clear and
enough is know n for a simplified account to be sketched. Studying the structure of ritual is not wedded, incidenta lly, to 'structu ral anthropology' or
'Structuralism' (though the connections with ' Post-Structuralism' are even
more tenuous). For Vedic, I m ay refer to the publications a lread y m entioned, and for the compariso n between the Vedic and the Taoist, to Schipper a nd Staal,forthcoming.
In order to study the structure ofa ritua l we must first of all establish a ppropriate units. This is not an arbitrary m atter and can only be don e by
studying other ritua ls. For example, if a ritua l seems to consist of five rites
which we m ay represent by the five numerals:
2

3

4

5,

we do not know whether the actual number of units should be la rger or
sm a ller, i.e., whether we have under- or over-analyzed. If it is larger, we
try to subdivide further. If it is smaller, there are several possibilities. If
two units have to be postul a ted, they mi ght be, for instance:
I -

2

and: 3 - 4 - 5

or:

33

1- 2 -

3 and: 4 - 5·

If we know another ritual that looks like:
12

3 8 9,

we a re entitled to assume th at the analysis (2) is more probable tha n (I) because '3 - 4 - 5' and '3 - 8 - 9' are less likely to be units tha n ' I - 2 - 3'
which occurs in both (2) and (3). If we conclude th at this assumption is correct, we express it by inserting in (2) a caesura between ' I - 2 - 3' and '4 - 5.'
Often the rituals themselves ma rk such a caesura. This discovery of the
'science of ritual ' was probably Indian. The concomita nt discovery of methods for marking the ends of mantras and sentences was the starting point
of linguistics. It is of equal importance for the development of logic, algebra
a nd the construction of a rtificial langu ages. Marking the end of a mantra
or sentence is connected with breathing: some sentences are, a nd most m a ntras should be uttered without taking breath. Yogic prälJ.äyäma and the like
a re connected with recitation. Such subdivisions are, in other words, real
a nd not only 'as logical as any other' (Nihom 1994: 74; in dance, mudras
a re used: de Zoete and Spies 1939).
Hooykaas discovered several methods in Sürya Sevana that a re used for
marking a caesura. H e refers to the chief of these as OM N I A:
& NANKEP I ( N ) is a code-word ... it is seen th at the officiating
priest addresses himself to all his perishabI e and imperishable cult objects, in doing so ma king it perfectly clear that he has terminated the preceding action or ch ain of actions ... in m any cases, though it cannot be
said to be general .. . (it is) followed by patarianan ( GESTU R ES ) .. . this frequency of sarikepi considerably helped me in subdividing the ritual into
80 parts (SuSe 24- 27).
SANKEP I ( N )

It is difficult to establish by what calculation Hooykaas arrived at his number. I have counted all markings of OMNIA and GESTU R ES in his text, including all types of typography a nd all sizes he makes use of, a nd arrive at '39'
and '38,' respec tively. There is one mention, in the translation, of SANKEPI,
which may indicate tha t '39' should be changed into '40' but that still does
not support the expiession 'in ma ny cases, though it cannot be said to be
genera!.'
To use Hooykaas' own subdivision is not easy either, for he adds areverse
order, provided with small letters, accents, single and double, after and before the capitals - e.g., A, Ea, T"c, 'Y"a, ...
It makes little sense to extend the discussion over ma ny manuscripts and
manuscript famili es, a nd get involved in disc ussions such as ' In th at case
th is item would be the end ofm y eb and not the beginning ofD. The mate-

34

rials at my disposal do not admit ora decision' (p.51 ). Traditions prolirerate
but there is no UR-TRUTH to be round here. However, wha t Hooykaas seeks
- a good subdivision - is or rund a mental significancc: it is the first step or a
st ructural analysis.
I used a simplcr method and counted in the perrormance or my single
priest-inrormant, repeated on a number or occasions, occurrences or GESTURES. I arrived at numbers ranging rrom '28' to '30' - ror eve n simple
counting is not easy.
From the point or view or structure, the one significant conclusion we a re
justified in deriving rrom these materi als is th a t this ritual consists or parts,
each or many or which consist or parts, each or many or which consist or
parts, each or many ... etc. The number or parts is not clear, and can only
be clarified ror a given case, but the general structure is what linguists call
a recursive phrase-structure. Such a structure may be represented by a tree,
e.g.:

x

~

ABC

D

1\ ;1\

MN

PQR

where A indicates, ror instance, the priest's arrival, Mand N (which belong
toge ther as 'B' ) the washing or his hands and reet, C rinsing his mouth and
P, Q and R (which belong together as 'D' ) the purification or sandalwood,
ri ce and Aowers, in that order. The entire tree X is a sub-branch or a larger
tree, or which there are other sub-branches Y, Z, .. . that correspond to other
parts or the ritual.
The recursive nature or these structures has been observed berore. Bateson and Mead (1942: 260) write: ' Each element is reduplicated a specified
number or times in each combination, and each combination is reduplicated a specified number or times ror a given ceremony.' The only scholar,
to my knowiedge, who has carried out a systematic analysis or Balinese ritua l along th ese lines is David Stuart-Fox in his unpublished dissertation or
1987, already mentioned. His Figure 8.7 provides a tree or the above rorm
which ex plicates fiv e phases (Purification and Invitation, perrormed by the
pemangku, Prestations, Counterprestation and Dispersion , perrormed by the
padanda ) that rec ur at the nex t lower level as identical sub-phases (StuartFox 1987: 262, culminating an analysis th at started with a description or
the fiv e phases on page 196). The fiv e phases exhibit a recursive inversion
a nd mayalso be analyzed in the rorm 'A B B A' where the first 'A' includes

35

Purifkation and Invitation, the first B refers to Prestation, the second B to
Counterprestation and the final A to Dispersion.
The inversion structure 'A B B A' occurs in more generalized forms in
Balinese ritual, again most easily eXplained when we represent rites by numerals:
2

3

4

5·····5

4

3

2

I.

We have already found a case in mantras, i.e., na-ma(M Si-vä-ya, 'homage to
Siva,' is replaced by ya-vä-Si ma-na, 'va-Si-to-mage-ho'. In mant ras, there are
many more particular structures and 'inversion' is a special case of 'transposition.' Another case of inversion is found in black magic when mantras
auspiciously ordered ang, ung, mang (as in OM = A U M), are ordered inauspiciously in the reverse direction as at the beginning of 'a sort of guide to
werewolfry' mentioned by Swellengrebel (1960: 51, referring to De Kat
Angelino 1921).
Of the many cases of inversion that are found in the ritual itself, I mention one that is explicit, one implicit and one absent from Hooykaas. The
first and most important inversion is the invoking of Siva in the first part of
the ritual and the sending-off of the deity in the second part which Hooykaas has indicated by means of accented capitals A' - Q and which is mentioned in general terms in the Introduction of SuSe (page 41 ).
The second illustration ofthe classic 'A - B - A' structure is implicit in the
directions the priest faces: he starts sitting on his platform facing west, turns
round after his first ablutions and faces east throughout the ritual. In the
end he turns round again and faces west to dispense the purified water to
his customers.
The third example ofinversion is continuous or 'dynamic': it is part ofthe
consecration of the bell with smoke which is done by moving the brazier
clockwise by the right hand immediately to the right of the bell which is
held in the left. This is done 21 times, in three rounds of seven, and is reminiscent of the starting of an ancient auto mobile (corresponding to the bell)
by putting a crankshaft into the engine in front and turning it around (corresponding to the clockwise movement of the brazier). Later in the ritual,
when the bell has done its part, or most of it, the movement is repeated,
again 21 times, but in the counterclockwise direction.
The most interesting structural property of the ritual is what linguists
have referred to as transformations. This means, roughly and in terms of
trees, that sub-branches moved to different branches change. It is easy to
see, in less abstract terms, why the water purification ceremony may possess this property: the water is purified in order to be used in various ways,
including in other ceremonies such as full and new moon (SuSe 176- 181),
birth, tooth-filing, marriage or cremation. In these cases, the padanda either

36

brings holy water along or sits on a specially prepared platform and prepares it there. In the first case he need not prepare it aga in but goes
through some of the moves; in the sccond he may not do the same as he custo marily does at home. There are co untless variations which may be d escribed as deviations or transform a tions of the pa radi gm case of SuSe.
M a ny are omissions but they a re not simple omissions: they are determined
by larger stru ctures in which they occur. How to describe these by precise
rules is not known since none of these materials have bee n properly studied
let a lone formaliz ed . It is likel y, on the face of it, that the ritual modifications tha t will be required cannot be desc ribed by rules less complex tha n
transform a tions. That same condusion seems to be hinted a t by Stuart-Fox
(lg8T Ig6) when he writes: 'The separate acts of the padanda tend to pa ra llel
those of the pemangku, though the details of the acts them selves a nd es pecially th e mantras a re different.'
We are entitl ed to condude that the structure of one Balinese ritual is the
sam e as that of the Vedic ritu al for which I provided the specifications elsewhere (e.g., Staal Ig83,II: 127 - 134). That the structure ofboth rituals is the
sam e has nothing to do with Indi ani zation or Convergence but is due to
the fac t that these ritual structures appear to be universa!. This hypothesis
is supported by the facts I am fa miliar with a nd ir it is correc t that would
not mean that these structures are, in any mann er of speaking, 'obvious'
structures: they are, on the contrary, very specific. Transformations are
similar to, and inversions dissimilar from la nguage. Ritu al co uld very weil
have had an entircly different structure but, as it happens, it possesses the
structure it possesses.
In several ea rl ier publicati ons, I linked the analysis of the structure of ritua l to the thesis of its meaningless ness. The two a re related but it is not
d ear whether th e link between them is th at of logica l implication. The former, structurally compl ex and ' positi ve' analysis has elicited less discussion
than the latter, 'negative' one. This has led to confusions for which I a m at
least in part responsible. I am still groping about in a dark forest but beli eve th a t a serious disc ussion ca n get o ff the ground only if and when rites
and rituals a re st udi ed much more thoroughl y than has ever been don e.
Whatever the value orthese caveats, it remains true of Bali also that mea ning is not intrinsic to ritua!. In the words of Stuart-Fox (lg87: 2Ig - 220)
who uses the concept of 'purpose' ra ther than 'meaning':
Purpose has the potential to change over time according to changes in
cultura l a nd religious ideology, a nd it can vary also from person to person according to the knowledge and experience each brings to the interpretation. Besakih, being what it is, is the subj ect of scholarly interpretation developed by the religion's intellectuals. It can be ex pected that
new modern interpretations, such as those authorized by the official Hin-

37

du organization, wil! gradual!y become part of popular knowiedge. To
take one example: formerly the local pemangku thought that the paselang
ritual during Bhatara Turun Kabeh referred to toothfiling (mapandes),
since it was known that paselang ritual was included in highly elaborate
toothfiling ceremonies. Why the gods should need their teeth filed was
conveniently neglected. Based on the study of the ritual itself and textual
sources unavailable to vil!agers, local intellectuals provided a more rationalizing interpretation that associated the ritual with the penetration of
the deity's powers and blessings into the natural and human worlds.

38

Chapter v

Tantra, Agama, Mantra and Language

So fin we have di se ussed Balinese ritua l in terms of current notions sueh as
'history,' ' text,' 'society' a nd 'religion.' I have suggested th a t 'tcx t,' 'reli gion'
and even 'society ' a rc of Iimited appli ca tion in the study of ritual. Th e first
two notions arc Europea n a nd ethnocentri c or most commonly understood
within a contex t that is ethnoce ntric. 1 have used one non- current or notyet-current Asian concept that is needed: mantra . It stands to reason that
ot her so-callcd te-ti c' or 'indigenous' terms wi ll be hclpful or necessa ry. In
this cha pter, we shall continue the disc ussion of Balinese ritua l in terms of
two such conce pts, both a lready referred to: tantra and tigama. The la tter
term is applicable to Balinese ritual in ils lndi an mea ning (' ritual tradition') a nd possesses the con fu sing advantage of being in addition the modern Indonesian term for the monotheisti c conce pt of 'reli gion,' the very notion I have a ttempted to get rid of. To furth er unravel the conceptual
tangle we need another co ncept, but that is a human universa l: language.
However, before we la unch onto tantra or iigama, let us retrace o ur steps.
I do not know whether th e Sürya Sevana rite of th e padanda Siva is typical
of an a llegedl y Indi anized Ba linese ritua l, but if it is we may generali ze
a nd draw from the preceding chapters the followin g tentative conclusions.
' Vith the exception of the important idea of cremation, which came from
Indi a but was combined with Balinese burial customs a nd recreated in an
original m anner, Balinese rites see m to have been provided with Indian
names without changing substanti all y. They probably incorporated other
Indi an ritual elements, possibly mudras, but the chiefrespec t in which they
were Indianized was mantras. Th ese did not merelyenter but seem to have
inunda ted the rites a nd replaced the songs or recitations that accompanied
them originally.

39

These conclusions are consistent with most of Hooykaas' own comparisons in SuSe Part IV, but one important issue that is raised there deserves
further examination. Hooykaas suggests, rightly I think, that the Baiinese
ritualist's lack of connection with any particular temple is related to the
fact th at he acts as a yogin who identifies himself with a deity. II The Balinese
ceremony seems more mystical than most or all of its apparently more
purely ritualistic Indian counterparts.
It is true that there is a certain 'stilIness' about the padanda's service. It is
the cause of the inaudibility of most ofhis mantras, many of which are muttered or ephemerized through meditation. Insofar as a stillness can be pronounced, th at stillness is more pronounced than in many Indian rituals,
certainly the Vedic. But stillness is not absent from Indian ritual. lts significance has not only been noted with respect to the Vedic by scholars (e.g.,
Renou and Silburn 1954), but novelist V.S. Naipaul has referred to it in his
illuminating observation that the expertise of Sou th Indian brahmin ritualists is the other side of the talent for mathematics and physics:
Out of that conftuence - the new education, the concern with the right
performance of complicated rituals, the stillness that went with the performance of some of those rituals - there had come a generation of scientists (Naipaul 1990: 152).
Hooykaas' observation about the mystical character of the padanda's ritual is
apt and the contrast with India is especially striking when we con fine ourselves to Vedic ritual. The difference is much smaller or dwindles to nothing if we look at the South Indian Saiva ritual to which he refers, a ritual
that is often called Agamic but that also fits, together with the padanda's
mantras and much of the history ofJavanese and Balinese ritual, under the
Tantric or Tantrik umbrella. (Cf. Levi 1933: XIX: 'there is no feature in this
Vedaparikrama which is not properly Tantric'; xxx: 'The whole Buddhaveda is a set ofTantrik fragments' ). But what is Tantra? Ifwe omit texts, the
rituals of Indian Tantrism are only very imperfectly known and it is much
too early to draw definite conclusions. What, then, would it mean to say
that much that is basic to Tantrism is also in accordance with the Balinese
facts as Hooykaas states them? Isn't it hazardous to refer to 'basic' features
of a movement about which there is so much uncertainty and unreliable
literature?
It may not be far off the mark to see in Tantrism a popular and originally
non-elitist combination or re-integration of two streams that had been sepa-

11 Yoga often involves identification with a deity but in the c1assical handbook of Yoga, Patafijali's rogasiitra,yoga does not mean 'union' but samiidhi, a state of concentration, and the
ultim a te aim of th e system is not union but kaivalya, ' isolation.'

40

rated at the end of the Vedic period: (I) ritual , a primarily brahmin specia lity that may be executed within the home, in templ es or e1sewhere; and (2)
knowi edge, meditation or yoga, the preocc upation of the wandering or
sedentary renoun cers ( Upani~adi c, J a ina and Buddhist), an activity aften
engaged in by a single person sitting in isolation under a tree, in a cave or
cellor on acremation ground. The form er variety is aften connected with
the vi llage, the latter with the countryside or ' forest.' In bath currents, m antras played an important role: they we re object of recitation in the first and
of meditation in the second. Put differently and whether looked upon as obj ec ts or means, m a ntras were audible first and becam e inaudibl e la ter.
The two streams a re distinguished in the I ndian tradition in terms of the
concepts of karman, 'ritual ,' and jiiäna, 'knowiedge.' The Vedas themselves
were in due course subdivided into karmakhii1}rja ('the ritual part,' the core
of the four Vedas which include thc main so urce of mantras: the saT(lhitii,
'continuously recited,' portions) andjiiiinakhii1}rja ('the knowledge part,' prim a rily the vedänta , 'end of the Vedas' or Upani~ads ) . The subdivision is
more precise than I can indicate here, and I have lumped 'knowIedge,'
'meditation' and 'yoga' together. The Upa ni~ads and Buddhism place knowledge above ritual, but the concept of meditation, which is intermediate between the two, has been treated differently in the two traditions. Buddhism
and various YogIs continued to emphasize m editations, with and (in the limiting case ) without mantras. Later followers of the Upani~ads, such as Sailkara , rej ected meditation because it is, like ritua l, a form of karman, i. e., an
activity that takes place in tim e a nd can therefore only have a temporary
and hence finite result. In Vedanta, m editation as upiisanii reta ins its status
on the lower level of exegetical interpretation where it is applied to the statements of the Upani~ads rather than to mantras. But th is is not 'meditation'
in the la ter sense; it is doser to mfmiiT(lsii, 'intense reAection,' a fter which
bath Mlmarpsa = Pürva Mlmarpsa and Vedanta = Uttara Mlmarpsa a re
named . The Upani~ads expressed the entire development in a nutshell
when they declared with rcference to ' the SeIP (iitman ) tha t is ' ta be hea rd ,
to be reAected on, to be m editated upon' (frotavyo mantavyo nididhyiisita vya~ :
BrhadaraDyaka Upani~ad 2.4.5; Muk ti Upani - ~ad I ; etc.).
The basic distinction between ritual a nd knowledge was retained in
Tantrism a nd in the Ägam as, but the various features were combined a nd
treated within a single system. In Buddhist T a ntrism, the standa rd categorics a re kriyii, caryii, yoga a nd anuttarayoga: the fa rmer two refer to ritual ,
the la tter two to 'yoga' a nd tho ugh the termjiiiina is not expli cit (perhaps because its Buddhist counterpa rt is prajiiii), it belongs here. We shall see tha t
the Ägamas reintroduce jiiiina a nd are, in that respec t and not unexpectedl y, doser to the Vedic heritage.
The history of m antras reAects these developments. In the Vedic periad,
ma ntras were recited c1ea rly or cha nted, som etimes shouted (the grammar-

41

ian PaI)ini formulates the rules in special cases such as vau~a!/) though some
were muttered or mental (mänasa ). The chief marks of professionalism and
excellence of the Vedic ritualist have always been a good memory, a clear
voice and 'purity of (enunciation of the syllables of) sound' ( ak~ara.fuddhi) .
In Tantra and Ägama, the two currents came together and ritual and meditation were combined. That characterizes the situation in Bali. It is likely,
therefore, th at it exhibits elements of Indianization. But convergence,
though impossible to determine at the present state of our knowiedge, is
not excluded: ritual, recitation and meditation occur worldwide along with
breathing and their combi na ti ons are unsurprising.
Even if Indian inAuences came primarily from South (east) India, they
would not have been confined to Saivism for Tantric Buddhism was th riving in important South Indian cities such as Kanchipuram until roughly
1000 A.D. The Buddhist padanda is there to remind us of th at background.
Another feature of Tantrism is also implied in this sketchy account: dei ties
are not as important as mantras. Their numbers may be prolific but their illusoriness is not surprising in Buddhism or the Vedanta and hence in Tantrism. In the Saivite Ägamas, dei ties are effectively identified with mantras
or parts of mantras (see, e.g., Brunner '986). This thesis runs parallel to the
elitist ritual philosophy of the Mlmarpsa in which the dei ties that occur in
injunctions ('perform ... for Agni' ) are sometimes regarded as grammatical
datives.
These developments explain the occurrence of Indian dei ties throughout
Southeast Asia, with identical names, similar attributes and forms yet often
strikingly different in appearance and feeling wh en represented in art - not
unlike the Indian elephants depicted on Tibetan paintings by artists who
had no direct knowledge of such beings. Levi ('933: XIV ) noted something
else: 'the most striking extern al feature of Balinese Hinduism is the complete absence of images of dei ties ... the fact is so much the more surprising
as the Balinese are wonderfully gifted for art ... if the shrine is empty, the
walls around are profusely ornamented with figures .. .' All of this is explained by the fact that it is through language and especially through mantras that dei ties travelled. ' 2
The Tantric background of Indo-Indonesian civilization was detected
early by Krom, Stutterheim, and others though the term was not always
used. It was implicit in Stutterheim's sagacious subdivision (adopted by
1 2 This is a simplification because dei ties travelled in mandala configurations that m ay be
textually transmitted (see, e.g., Nihom 1994, es pecially Chapter 2) and also visualized.
Moreover, pilgrims retu rning from South Asia, especially the Buddhist, sometÎmes carried
small devotional figures which 'played a significant role in the transmission of styles' (Melikia n 1995: 7). But eve n when stylist ic conventions were similar, 'their aesthetic handling
could be utterly different' (ibid. ).

42

Goris) of inscriptions into 'Buddhist' a nd 'non-Buddhi st:' for there a re, in
Ba li as on J ava, 'orthodox,' tha t is, non-Ta ntric Buddhist insc riptions, but
th e o thers a re not always clearly Saivite and cer tainl y not 'Hindu' (cf.
above page 12): they a re Ta ntric. Stutterheim a lso defended the 'convergence' thesis tha t the so-call ed ' Hindu tempIes' of J ava were no tempies,
not Hindu and not built by Hindus (Stutterheim 193 Ib ).
After wondering why the Buddhist a nd non-Buddhi st inscripti ons of
Pej eng could occ ur together (th eir locations we re, in fact, a t som e dista nce
from eac h other) a nd whether the Buddhist preceded the non-Buddhist or
vice versa, Stutterh eim writes in the ra ther circumsta nti a l ma nner he
adopted in some ofhi s Dutch writings, here rende red into English:
And thus one wonders about the sha rp division drawn by the m a nua ls between Buddhism and Saivism in J ava during the middle-Javanese period, seeing in Saivism a na tiona l rel igio n, but in Buddhism a rather interna tiona l, a t a ny rate foreign religion. Without diminishing the valu e of
the la tter opposition, for which I am willing to take responsibility, I feel
I must cast doubt on th e a lleged impropriety of the going-together of
Saivite a nd Buddhist cha rac teristi cs in one pi ace, a ll egedly based upon
what is know n about the Sailendra kingdom onJava during th at peri od .
The contents of the fragments we have given a nd other investigations
m ay show tha t such a going-toge ther was ve ry weil possible because of
the great simila rities and th a t we have to look there for the origin of the
rem a rkable Balinese combina ti on of padand a siwa a nd pada nd a boed a ,
a combination which mu st have exi sted a lso in Ce ntra l J ava a nd must
have ori gina ted in Central J ava during the Sa ilendra period by the absorpti on of younger Buddhist elements into ea rli er Sa ivism (Stutterh eim
1929, I.·60 - 6 I.) I ~

':1 Aldus zo u men, a fgaa nd e op de in d e ha ndbo eken ge trokken sc herpe scheiding t usschen
Buddhisme en Ç iwais me op J ava in d en midd elj avaa nsehen tij d , d e vraag wi llen stellen,
d aa rbij in het Ç iwa isme ziend e ee n na ti onale, in het Buddhisme d aare ntege n ee n min of
m eer intern a ti ona le, a lth a ns huit enl a nd sc he god sdi enst. Zond er ove r d e waa rd e va n d eze
laa tste tege nstelling, di e ik gaarne op m ij n ve ra ntwoo rd ing nee m , veel a f te dingen , moet
ik toch het ni et-moge n-sa mengaa n va n çiwa itisc he en b udd histi sc he kenm erken op een
plek, zoals me n d a t uit de gegeve ns ove r ee n Ça ilendra-rijk op J ava in di en tijd zo u willen
a Aeiden, betwijfelen .
De inhoud va n d e boven gegeve n fr agm enten beneve ns d e laa tste onderzoe kingen kunn en
la ten zien d a t zulk ee n sa mengaan op gron d va n d e groote overee nkomsten zee r goed mogelij k was en da t wij d aa rin dus in ze keren zin den oors prong hebben te zien va n de eige naa rd ige balische com bina ti e va n pedand a siwa en ped a nd a boed a, we lke co mbin a ti e op J ava
nat uurlijk ook moet hebben bes taa n en op M idden-J ava in den Çail cnd ra-tijd moe t zijn
ontstaa n doo r de opname va n buddhi sti sc he, j ongere elementen in het oud ere Ç iwa isme.

43

In Stutterheim's time, Buddhism was still largely known in the Theraväda
forms studied by Rhys Davids and other Protestant schol ars and was regarded as a puritan faith . Mahäyäna was looked upon as a degeneration
due to the absorption, from 'Hinduism,' of mantras, magical practices and
other allegedly bad features. Deconstructionists still have some work to do
in this area where theologians have reigned too long: for Buddhism is not a
religion and certainly not a 'faith' (cf. Schopen 1991 ). We now know that
Mahäyäna has a good if not impeccable pedigree and retains materials
th at go back to an early period. Mahäyäna Buddhism entered Sri Lanka
(Ceylon ) and spread not only to Central and East but also to Southeast
Asia where it was, in Burma and Thailand, replaced by Theraväda at a later period. We also know that Tantrism, Buddhist and Saivite, far from
being aJavanese invention, was preponderant in India from the early centuries A.D. and spread not only to Central and East but also to Southeast
Asia, thus easily combining with the diffusion of the more traditional forms
of Buddhism with which it was in competition.
Much ofthis information was available to Krom (1924: 203 note I):
We do not deny that Buddhism, in its country of origin and prior to its introduction to Java, had in several respects undergone Sivaite influences,
the less so because both religions had developed in a Tantric direction
and were therefore naturally inclined to grow toward each other. '4
The historical development ofTantrism poses more and more complex problems than these early pioneers were aware of or I am competent to unravel
let alo ne expound. The latest contribution to this field of study, Nihom
1994, uses the expression 'Indo-Indonesian Tantrism.' Nihom combines a
devastating attack on the post-war Leiden Indonesianists' emphasis on 'typically Javanese' syncretisms with a spirited defense of the 'Greater India'
perspective of pre-war Dutch scholars who were trained in Indology and
Buddhology. Unfortunately, the latter fields of study have, in the mean
time, developed in increasingly diverging directions: some Indologists write
as ifBuddhism did not exist and some Buddhologists similarly ignore India.
On the geographical origins of the Tantra much speculation continues, e.g.,
on the extent of the contributions of the subcontinent's extreme northwestern or northeastern corners - Kashmir and Assam, roughly speaking
(i.e., at the boundaries of South Asia with South-east, Central andfor East

'4 Dat het (Buddhisme) reeds in zijn oorspron kelijk vaderland, voor de invoering op J ava,
in allerlei opzichten Çiwaitische invloeden had ondergaan, ontkennen wij allerminst, te
minder waar beide godsdiensten in tantrische richting ontwikkeld waren en daardoor uit
den aard der zaak geneigd waren naar elkander toe te groeien.

44

Asia; cf. Gupta et al. 1979: 36- 39, not always clea rly consistent with 17- 25).
At the same time, many scholars did and do not use the term tantra clearly
or consistently. Levi criticized Goris for failing ' to perceive the evidentl y
Tantric character of the whole ritual' (1933: xix ) but it is not clear what he
m eans by Tantric himself. Gonda in his 1970 study on Siva in Indonesia
clearly states (p.30) tha t Tantrism tended to erase the differences bet ween
Hinduism and Buddhism in India before it happened in Indonesia, but
after prima rily using the appellation 'sivaitisch,' in line with his title, he
shifts gradually, via 'sivaitisch-tantrisch,' to 'tantrisch.'
The concept of agama belongs in the same context though some of the
most bafRing conceptual confusions surrounding its use have a ppeared
only in recent times. In Sanskrit, the term may refer to many things including 'tradition' in general and any particular tradition in particular. It is
used, in particular, of a development of Saivism in Southeast Indi a (viz.,
the Tamil country ) starting after the middl e of the first millennium with a
class of works called Saivagamas which inspired numerous others. In theory,
these works deal with four categories, clea rly reminiscent of the distinctions
we discussed earl ier: (I) jiiana, ' knowiedge,' (2) y oga, (3) kriya and (4) carya.
The last two refer to form s of ritual but are not distinguished in the same
way in different texts. The first term is closer to the Vedic than to the Tantric anuttarayoga. Wh atever the role of theory, all 'concentra te on religious
practi ce' (Gonda 197T (66), i.e., on ritual and yoga. R eferring to Brunner
1977, the Sinoiogist Strickm ann (1983: 419) wrote: 'There is no doubt that
in these long neglec ted scriptures li es the origin of modern Indian religious
ritual, a nd the Sa ivagamas a re no whit less significant in respect to subsequent developments th an the Vedas were before them .' The jiiana component of these ritual traditions is related to a more purely interpretative and
philosophical developmcnt referred to as Saiva Siddhanta. There are also connections with Southeast Indi a n bhakti or 'devotiona l' movem ents but these
are principally connected with ViglU rather than Siva and are often oflater
date. The term agama occured in Cambodia, Java a nd Ba li, not always in
the same meanings. Whatever the ex tent of their contribution, it is clear
that there are connections between these Ägamas and Balinese ritual
(Gonda 1970: 5; 1977: 175; etc.).
Gonda did not use the term agama in his 1970 study, but had paid due attention to it in his Sanskrit in Jndonesia of 1952 (pages 43, 46, 175,244, etc.).
It is the first example discussed in his chapter on 'Sem anti c Change and Historical Evolution' (p.330):
In Sanskrit, agama, apart from other use, designates 'a traditional precept,
doctrine, body of precepts, collection of such doctrines'; in short, 'anything handed down as fixed by tradition'; it is, moreover, the na me of a
class of works inculcating the so-called tantric worship of Siva and Sakti.

45

In OldJavanese it could apply to a body of customary law or a Dharmabook, and to religious or moral traditions, and the words sari hyari 'the divine, holy' often preceding it emphasize its superhuman character. The
term is, moreover, used to signify the religious knowledge of a brahmin,
and also that of a high Buddhist functionary. Islam, in the spread of
which many compatriots of Sivaists and Buddhists who had led the way
into the Archipelago took an important part, adopted the term, and so
did, in the course of time, Christianity...
In modern Indonesia, the Department of Religious Affairs uses the term
agama for 'religion' interpreted in monotheistic terms. In doing so, it has incorporated the legacy of Dutch inspired 'Bureaux for Religious Affairs' and
a variety of missionary forebears. 15 This interpretation is canonized in the
' 5 Muslims in th e D epartm ent of Religion kn ew from the start that they had a common
cause with Christianity; the Koran says so. They did not need resort to divida et impera since
the Christians remained di vided into Catholics and Protes ta nts. The remaining task - the
imposition of the concept of monotheistic religion on other traditions - is not compl eted
and Balinese members of th e Depa rtm ent, though not finished at hom e, are still trying to
convince the Dayaks (and others mutatis mutandis ) that their newly labe lled kaharingan is a
form of ' Hinduism.' In Bali itself, the speciali zed knowledge needed for Sürya Sevana a nd
other similar rites-without-religion may be on the wane, but the faithful are now awakened in non-tourist areas in Buleleng (northern Bali ) by latter day Bali Hindu muezzin
loudspeakers intoning the Gayatrf mantra, rece ntly imported intact from India (after it
had al ready becom e know n to some Balinese through modern scholarship: Goris 1926:
143- 144). Such Islamization or Monotheization is supported or supplemented by fresh Indianization. A new wave of Sanskrit mantras and expressions is entering the Ba linese language, including omsvastyastu 'Om! It is good, it should be!' found at the entrance to puras,
puris, griyas, etc. and used as a greeting, perhaps somewhat self-consciously. Is it intended
as an improvem ent on Indian namaste, an alternative to assalämu 'alaikum or both? Whateve r its status, it has mad e its way into outlines of the Balinese language for japanese tourists a long with ( Upani~adic ) Ol[! fänti fänti fän ti 'Om! Peace Peace Peace!' which is offered
as a translation of sayonara!
However, we shou ld not take a short term view. Monotheist opinions have always ranged
from the fundam entalist to the tolerant and Islam came to Indonesia as a result not of
holy war but oftrade. The Dutch protected Bali from missionaries for similar economic reasons (tourism ) whi ch continue to be operative. Unlike monotheistic religion, which insists
on th e accepta nc e of truths that are immune to revision, Balinese culture, which includes
rituals along with dances, other performing arts and much e1se, does not conflict with
science or progress. It continu es to be vigorous and is likely to survive. Hooykaas
(197T 105) was optimistic about the continuation of templ e festivities and the pamangku's ritua!. The· links betwee n ritual and culture were placed in perspective by Ida Padanda
Gde Manuaba when eX plaining to Professor Vredenbreg t why different padandas may use
different styles of mudra: sebetulnya ada seni tetapi Jungsi sama saja, 'in fact , it is art, but th e
function is the same.'

46

first principle of the Pancasila as Ketuhanan Yang Maha Esa, 'Belief in One Almighty God.' lronically, the Department refused for many years to accept
'Balinese Hinduism' as agama although the term in its predominant lndian
connotation referred to a ritu a l development that not only characterizes
the Balinese ritual-without-religion but denotes one of its primary sources.
The status ofBuddhism, which is similar, remains undetermined.
Another maxim of modern Indonesia: bhineka tunggal ika, 'unity in diversity,' which supplements the Pancasila without failing to mirror the American motto e pluribus unum, also goes back to the Indo-Indonesian Saivitef
BuddhistfTantricfÄgamic 'coalition' (a concept Gonda '970: 28 prefers to
'syncretism' ): for it is taken, as is weil known, from the assertion by the fourteen th century Tantric Buddhist Sutasoma that the truths ofJina (i. e., Buddha) and Siva a re one.
But let us leave Tantra and Ägama a nd return to the elem ent that is conspicuous everywh ere: mantras. Our conclusion that the chief instruments
ofIndianization were mantras is in accordance with a variety of facts in addition to the ones we have already met with. First of all, mantras tend to
be complex and exceptionally difficult to learn, more even than the ritual
itself, which is in accordance with the fact that the agents of lndianization
must have been ritual specialists, wh ether brahmins or Tantrics, who possessed a font of knowl edge into which outsiders not only were not but also
could not be easily initiated. The initiation of the experts themselves had
taken many years and passed through several stages such as the learning of
mantras (iidhyiiya ) and that of their adaptation to ritual use or ritual application (prayoga ), both already mentioned.
That such expert knowledge is rel eva nt to our subject is obvious. It is often ignored or neglec ted, for example, by Geertz (passim ) or Schulte Nordholt ('99' : 38) when he discusses recent opposition by commoners to 'the
dominance of the social a nd ritual hierarchy in Bali , as embodied by the
Brahman priesthood' and declares: 'The Eka Dasa Rudra of '979 and the
Panca Wali Krama of '978 and '989 were almost exclusively officiated by
Brahman Priests.' If we take ritual seriously - as is done by commoners in
Asia and might be expected from scientists who regard it as a source of political authority - the question of knowledge logically precedes that of dominance just as competence is prior to performance and pace Nietzsche or
Foucault: for who but a brahmin - or Tantric - is competent to officiate in
a large and complex ritual ?
Other facts support the thesis of mantras as the chief means of Indianization indirectly. They include D e Casparis' suggestion ('983: 4, quoted in
Kulke '990: '3 note 3) that the Kutei Sanskrit inscriptions of Eastern Kalimantan of slightly before 400 A.D. may weil refer to 'a truly Indonesian
ceremony ' despite their being inscribed on an apparently Vedicyupa or 'sacrificial pote' ('perhaps to the delight ofVedists': Nihom '994: 69). This sug-

47

gestion complements Stutterheim's observation about the Indonesian character ofthe great monuments ofJava, and the Balinese character ofthe Sürya Sevana rite and of Balinese cremation. With specific reference to funerary and ancestral rites, this thesis is in line with the simplistic but
nonetheless perceptive observation of 1887 by the then Collector of Malabar, William Logan, about the advent of the Nambudiri brahmins in Kerala: 'They posed before the rude chieftains with whom they came in contact
as 'God-compellers.' Their sonorous mantrams and spelIs could compel the
gods to take the wandering ghosts of even the worst of men directly to
heaven' (Malabar Manual quoted in Staal 1983, I: 92).
If it is true th at the chief elements ofIndianization were mantras, it does
not detract from Kulke's chief conclusions about state formation on both
sides of the Bay of Bengal; but some of his other observations appear in a
new light and have to be placed in a wider historical and geographical context. The mystery remains, for Malabar Manual type assertions do not explain why mantras, themselves often meaningless, were so effective in ritual
and, allegedly, through ritual as means of legitimation. Whatever the mystery, we have to take account of a historical fact: the importation of mantras is not confined to regions bordering on the Bay of Bengal or Indian
Ocean; for mantras played a similar role in Northwest India al most two
millennia earlier.
We still do not know what languages were spoken in the various centres of
the Harappan civilization before the advent of the Indo-European and subsequently Vedic semi-nomadic tri bes. These languages may have been already Indo-European though the majority of specialists seem to consider it
more likely that they were Dravidian. One hypothesis does not exclude the
other for we are dealing with many regions and centuries. It is clear th at
few things remain of the various waves of Indo-European semi-nomadic
bands th at trickled in across the high mountain ranges that separate Central Asia from Iran and the Indian subcontinent: their Indo-European
gods have largely disappeared, of their social structure only the exogamous
brahmin galra survives (see pages 94ff. below), and apart from elements of
life-cycle rites among the higher castes, remnants of their larger rituals
have been long extinct or become exceedingly rare. Only two major features of Indo-European have lasted: the Sanskrit language of classical Indian civilization together with its numerous Indo-Aryan relatives and offshoots (Masica 1991 ); and the mantras of the Vedas, especially the Rigveda
which had been composed by the poets of these semi-nomadic pastoralists
as early as the third millennium B.e.
Why indigenous Indians adopted an Indo-European language is not
easily explained. It is likely that there were extended periods ofbilingualism
(an idea first voiced by Murray Emeneau and now gene rally accepted:
Deshpande 1993). The problem is not confined to India for Indo-European

48

languages entered other areas and replaced other languages in similar ways
(Mallory 1989: 257 - 261 ). In South Asia something else happened in
addition. Not only Indo-Aryan languages established themselves and produced a Aowering of languages and cu ltures, but bits and pieces of the
Vedas became mantras and acquired extraordinary power and longevity,
producing more and other waves of mantras, generally preserving their
structural properties. The proliferation of mantras is due to a great variety
of causes which changed over the centuries. In Bali, for example, 'the number of mantra increases partly because certain additional offerings possess
their own mantra and partly because more mantras are uttered at certain
key points in the ritual (aften marked: FS) where one mantra would have
sufficed at smaller rituals' (Stuart-Fox 1987: 172).
The continued existence of a language or language family, once it has
been established a nd become a vehicle of civi lization, is perhaps not a surprising event - we got used to it, at any rate. But nowhere else in the world
have large numbers of mysterious and unintelligible language-like bits of
sound spread with a force and tenacity that al most resembles the spread of
a virus. The epidemic dimensions of mantra diffusion are nothing short of
astounding.
This mantra expansion may have something to do with the Vedic language being no longer understood; with the legitimation of social change
that Call110t be eXplained - as earl ier generations of scientists believed - by
military conquest or cultural superiority; 'simple supcrstition' (that is, by explaining obscurum per obscurius ); or something else. Whatever the circumstances, legitimation through mantras, generall y through the intermediary
of ritual, must have been as common during the Vedic period as during later periods of South and Southeast Asian history. Some of ;ts most straightforward features have long attracted the attention of scholars, e.g., the ritual of the Asvamedha horse sacriflce celebrated to establish, expand or
legitimize a king's territory. But we sti ll have not answered the question as
to why ritual might be in a position to legitimize political authority. I beli eve that more than ritual is at stake and that the power of mantras is connected with the power of language to which Indi ans began to refer as brahman. That power and its origins would take us further afleid and I refer for
it to another publication (Staal,Jorthcoming ).
The facts that remain are that mantras entered Sou th Asia before the beginning of the last millennium E.c., perhaps replacing earl ier mantras as
they were to do later, and were preserved chieAy by brahmins and latcr by
Buddhists and jor Tantrics, who in due course enriched and exported them
further and in ever larger quantities to regions as distant from their original
homes as Japan and Bali.
The spread of the Indo-European languages during the last three thousand years is not easi ly explained (one hypothesis has it that the original im-

49

petus was due not to people but to their horses who went in search of fresh
grasslands); but it seems to have followed similar patterns in the various
areas where earlier languages were replaced . The concomitant spread of
mantras did not occur in Europe or most other regions where Indo-European languages entered, perhaps because of the invention of writing, but
similar sacred noises are found in many oral societies: they survive in magic
(e.g., Egyptian papyri) or religion (e.g., glossolalia) and continue to occur,
in small numbers, in modern societies where they perform a variety of basic
functions on the fringes oflanguage, often with formal and phonetic characteristics. 16 The extraordinary spread of mantras over South and Southeast
Asia may reflect even earl ier events and more archaic characteristics of the
entire area, in which case Indianization through mant ras itself is a feature
of convergence at a more abstract leve!. How should this be conceived?
It is conceivable th at the mantra-stage was more widespread in ancient,
oral civilizations than is presently known, at least to me. Mantras are essentially oral and leave no trace in prehistory or archaeology. I have argued
elsewhere that they preserve a pre-linguistic stage of evolution. That would
support and be supported by the hypothesis that language originated in
Asia (cf. Freeman Dyson 1985 et al., discussed in Staal,forthcoming). If both
hypotheses are true, the subsequent flourish of mantras in th at part of the
world is likely to be a kind of return to an earlier stage of evolution.
Ritual and mantras exhibit universal characteristics. Foremost among
these are abstract structura! properties that occur in the life sciences beyond the domain of the human anima!. Other ritual traits are not confined
to humans either. Ethologists are familiar with the marking of animal territory through 'sprinkling' or 'pouring' a nd everyone knows what a dog does
against a stone. The classicist and historian of Greek religion Walter Burkert has drawn attention to classical comparisons of the sprinkling of hermai
to the dog's behaviour (Burkert 1979: 43). These dogs join the cats and
horses we met with before and such facts alone are sufficient to demonstrate
that ritual is not the exclusive domain of historians, philologists, anthropologists, theologians and other human or social scientists even if they were to
combine forces.
Unlike Christians marching onward from the Carolingian R enaissance
(when Germanic cremation became, in a ma nner of speaking, a capital offence), the Balinese have skilfully blended Indonesian burials with Indian

,6 Mantras are independent of la ng uage but have important phonetic properties including
preference for nasality, clear, high vowels and aspiration (= breathing). For exampl e, HA-I ,
a stobha of the Samaveda and a Tantric bya-mantra reappears in different spellings but
pronounced with the sa me diphthong inJapanese HAl ' yes!', (fascist) German HEIL! , the
beginning of the Muslim call for prayer in Arabic I:I AYYA ('a la ~ - ~a l a ) a nd American Hl!

50

cremation, using fire in a new manner a nd turning the res ult into such theatrical splendour th at it misled a well-known American anthropologist once
much quoted. Southeas t Asia has no t only created the greatest monuments
of Indian Buddhi st and Ta ntri c genius, such as Angkor and Borobudur as
was first notcd by Sylvain Levi (cf. Kulke 1990: 31 ); it a lso evolved thc
m ost resplendent manifestations of a n Indian ritual: thc rites of cre mation
that Aourished in Burma and Th ail and until very rece ntly a nd a re now
one of the main touri st attrac tion s of Bali.
Ritu a l is subj ect to the constraints of the physical universe a nd thereby
enables us to distinguish between civilizations. Indi an grammarians a nd 10gicians, a lways co ncern ed with the d ema rcation of meaningful from meaningless ex pressions, did not fail to note it: th eir stock-example of ayogyata,
'sem a ntic incompatibility' or ' non-sense' is: agnina sincati, 'sprinkles with
fire.' The implied contrast is with the perfec tly meaningful common expression tïrthena :;incati, 'sprinkles with water.' They knew it a nd wc know it because la ngu age and ritu a l must confirm , at least in some respec ts, to the universe where fire a nd water do not mix. Thc gap m ay be bridged , perhaps,
by the inspiration of m a ntras, th at is, breaths of fresh air.

51

Appendix

I

The Mudras of Ida Padanda Gde Agung
Dick van der M eij

While conducting resea rch into the Sürya Seva na ritual of the Balinese
Padanda in the spring of 1995, Frits Staal was a \lowed by Ida Padanda Gde
Manuaba to borrow a manuscript on rituals in Bali containing drawings of
the mudras the Padanda uses during the performance of his ritual. These
drawings were photocopied and are presented and eXplained here with the
permission of th e Padanda.
We need only glance at Hooykaas' S71rya-Sevana (SuSe ) to see that tex ts on
Balinese ritu a l a re num erous a nd th at it is not the first time drawings of
mudras are published. In the 1920's, Tyra de Kleen published 59 pages of
drawings of mudras she made herself. They were published in Dutch
(1922), G erm an (1923), and English (1924). Mudras shown in other books
usua ll y derive from th ese, for example in Hooykaas' SuSe (1966), Stuti and
Stava (1971 ), and Balinese Bauddha Brahmans (1973). The mudras she presented were from both Saiva and Ba uddha Padanda. Hooykaas' SuSe and BaLinese Bauddha Brahmans also conta in drawings of mudras made by the late I
Gusti Ngurah K etut Sangka from the Saren Kangin of Puri Gde Krambitan . Neither Tyra de Kleen nor Ratu Sangka were Padandas a nd their drawings were made for a foreign public. Tyra de Kl een's drawings a lso provide
information on the posture of the priest, his dress and ritual utensils.
For Balinese Bauddlza Brahmans, a co\lection of draw ings were made by Id a
Bagus Made Poleng of Tebes Aya nea r Ubud a nd published by Hooykaas
in an article in B SOAS (1963: 544- 550) and in Balinese Baudda Brahmans
(1973: 27- 4 6).

53

The collection presented here differs from the ones mentioned above primarily because it was made by a Padanda for the use of a Padanda. '7 The
drawings form the first part of a description of his rituals. The manuscript
consists of 99 pages. The drawings of the mudras are found on page 2 - 18.
Page 19 contains a drawing ofthe Padanda in fulI at ti re and page 20- 38 contain the text on the Sürya Sevana ritual, specifying actions and mantras.
The rest of the manuscript contains information on other rituals and wilI
not be touched upon here.
According to the information Ida Padanda Gde Manuaba furnished, the
drawings were made by his grandfather, Ida Padanda Gde Agung, around
1941. The manuscript itself does not contain a colophon.
The drawings present the mudras showing the position of the hand and
the way the fingers should be held. The hands are presented in a position
such as to make the mudras most easily understandable. Thus the hand is
pictured from the front, the side or the back in order to show the most significant details of the mud ra. ActualIy, mudras are not performed in isolation, but in a continuous flow of elegant action. NaturalIy, features of continuity and grace cannot be converted to paper. The drawings contain no
indication of flowers of other ritual implements.
The pages ofthe mudras in the manuscript are unnumbered. I have numbered the sets of mud ras I- XVII for easy reference. Each mudra is accompanied by a text, provided by Ida Padanda Gde Agung himself. Some specify
names: this applies to the mud ras of XII, which deal with the macrocosmos
(bhuvana agung ) and those of XVII which deal with the microcosmos (bhuvana aLit ). The majority of the mudras are accompanied by fragments of the
mantras (or entire mantras: e.g., X- XI ) with which they are associated.
Some mudras occur in groups that accompany sequences of acts. Roughly,
the sequence of mud ras folIows the unfolding of the ritual - types of information that the existing publications did not or only rarely provide. The
drawings do not present the entire sequence of the ritual, only the basic
hand gestures. In SuSe, many mudras and mantras occur repeatedly. If
they occur repeatedly, the user should refer to the same drawings.
As rightfulIy pointed out by Hooykaas, manuscripts on ritual are written
by those 'nourris dans La grrya' (Hooykaas 1966: 13) for the 'bon entendeur à qui
demi-mot sujfit' (Hooykaas 1966: II ). Ulaka Saiva, brahmins who are to be ordained, learn their rituals using aides-mémoires written on palm leaf or in
drawing books, often containing hundreds of gestures and body positions.
The drawings have clearly been made for a person already familiar with

'7 This explains, for example, lhal th e long nails drawn in some of the drawings that were
published before are not found in the present collection: growing long nails is a social custom familiar to ritualists but without ritual significanee.

54

the mud ras. T he user of the ma nuscript will have to have had prior experience with the mudras in order to perform them satisfactoril y.
In the follow ing translitera tions, references a re m ad e to the corresponding passages in SuSe. The order of mudras in our coll ection does no t a ppear
to be a lways the same as in SuSe. Usua lly, in m anuscripts of this nature
exac t simila rity is no t expec ted . T hese tex ts come fro m a traditi on wh ere
written transmi ssion pres upposes oral tra nsmission a nd m ayor may not
compl ement it.
The mud ras ofthis ' 94 1 collecti on a re basic mudras. There a re composite
a nd more complex mudras, such as the mudra of fig ure I (p. 13). Together
they form a sm all percentage of the mudras used in Balinese ritua l. No thing is known a bout their act ua l number, structural co mposition (can they
be reduced to more basic form s? ) or relationship to mudras of ritua l, dance
or iconography elsew here in Asia.

55

J

J

(V~\

, ,~ë:d)
,Q'ó~

o

\.!)

, \ n>!> ,L)
" '-h Ir)
d 19)
!\f"V')

56

ul

I-a

Siwa Tatwa
Widya Tatwa
Atma Tatwa

I-e

Ong Leng
Aiswaryya

I-b

OmOng
Anäntäsana

I-f

Ong Ong
Wéragya

I-C

Ong, Reng
parma

I-g

OmOng
Padmasana

I-d

U R eng
jiiäna

I-h

OmOng
Padmahredaya

I-a
I-b
I-c-h

Tri Tattva : SuSe 56, 68, 82, [108]
Gavé Anantäsana : SuSe 68
Nyäsa Sang Hyang Catur Aisvarya : SuSe 68- 7°, [102]

57

~
/

58

11

II-a

Ang Äng
Kang Kang Ga ng

II-e

Leng Löng
pang Dang Thang

II-b

Ing Ing
Gang Ngang Cang

II-f

Aing Eng
Tang Thang Dang

II-C

Ung Üng
Cang J ang Aing

II-g

Ong Aung
p a ng Dang Phang

II-d

Reng Reng
Nyang p a ng p a ng

II-h

AngAh
Phang Bhang Bang

It is not clear where these mudras be long but they are commonly used and
reAec t linguistic regularities, e.g. vowe ls and diphthongs: a - i - u (e - 0 - ai au ) or semivowels: r - I (cf. above, page 10)

59

I1

.

»~vJl
cL

/
}!cvÇ)

, : :J?.m .VJJ
v

<Ilo

""

I )

'I~~ (

vG;

/0

8<:;)

,llç:; 1'/ ~,}5 ~
'
c

/ I

CV 0J ti
,ItÇ,J(v
i

I I
:t~~
~ ,tAWl

\?r'

I I
U
CD CV I{
u ~ «VIi;

00

! ~i>~lO

60

)

,~

'1\ )
t

./

~ ,l5l11)

v~pfn
l /
({

J1

cLCJ
i~, "/J7«5)

~ ,~

tr95id

•

Il 0 eb tl

IJ)

1

rA

Su

/

/

ul~' }ijl
I-

I'l~ebl:f1ebOJ'r:)
'El) rnJ) ))

cl Il ',

J ,· ,
a~
C:fG
G

o L

cb~ •
{;t~1:fj3~!
,

V(

ft()I)1)

/

/~

" (f)\
'

y~~

:

I I
Il
cvC!J
[, <J; lfilD A
é

~<bQ

c • (nOl

~ t-~()l

!

111

III-a

Ong Mang
Rang Dipta

III-C

OngWang
Ong Réng Wibhuta

m-b

OngYang
Ong Ring

m-f

Ong Sang
Ong Réng Wimala

Sük~ma

III-C

Ong Rang
Ong RüngJaya

III-g

Ong Sang
Ong Rong Amoga

m-d

Ong Lang
Ong Rüng Bhadra

m -h

Ong Sang
Ong Rong Widyuta

m-a-h

Sang Hyang Nava-Sakti-Nyasa ring dala-müla : SuSe 7'2

61

wJJ .J;

~ 3~
(TI)
W)

(4J~
mJ

OJ}~,

"} '0{i '1

62

C{1)

-

IV
Iv-a

Ong Ang Ah

Iv-e

Ong Rang Sarwwatomoki

Iv-b

Ong Ang Kang
Ka~ol kaya sad

Iv-f

Ong Ang Kang
Ka~olkaya Tatpurusa

IV-C

Ong Ang Kang
Ka~ol kaya Bamadéwa

Iv-g

Ong Ang Kang
Ka~ol kaya ISana

Iv-d

Ong Ang Kang
Ka~ol kaya Aghora

Iv -a-g

Sang Hyang Brahmangga-Nyasa : SuSe 74

63

(~~cb
3~~. \.Q

~

/

)Ç)

6"

W1)

/

Heb
iU

IJ

0'>

""' . ~

'O)IJ 3( "lij»

)Çl~'l"

64

N;.Q "I

0::(

t!if)

/

I
\.D

eb

J~llÇ)

6"

v

v-a

Ang Hreclaya

v-e

Bha ng Né tra

v-b

R eng K ayasirasé na m a h

v-f

Bha ng Nétra

v-c

Ong Bhurbhüwa hswa h

v-g

Ong Hüng R a h pha t astra

v-cl

Ong Hreng K awasa

v -a-g

Sang H yang Sivangga-Nyasa : SuSe 74, [106]

65

/fJt>

(

1

cbJ

Jl ~
eb 3~.u
eb ~

~~ 3~ 'fiJ'

8 "lt.G"lö)1

L~J"

(
./

~

t{chcb
&

~ 3:;~

[1,)

11.8

.

Ci)

v~ ~
Q
UilJlP 1

V

66

1)

1)~1
I

util~J
~ 3~~
1~Jll

cb<b

JfI~ 3~ffi)

t:iJl

1)

.

VI
VI-a

Ong Ang Sarwwadéwa

VI-e

Ong Ang Suklyé

VI-b

Ong Ang

Re~i

VI-f

Ong Ang Bhaktyé

VI-C

Ong Ang Pitra

VI-g

Ong Ang

VI -d

Ong Ang Saraswatyé

VI-h

Ong AngJambhikäyé

vl-a-d
vl-e-h

Sang Hyang Piq--Ädi-Nyäsa : SuSe 76
Sang Hyang Catur Sandhyä : SuSe 76, [102]

Ka~nyé

67

I

tJeb J II

(I't~(llllP ,~
ftQ

(;J'

~,

~ /lit~~
!: a5lJl

68

'

VII
VII-a

VII-a
vII-b-e

Ong Ang Kang
Ka~olkaya Siwagarbba

VII-b

Ong Sang Soma

VII-C

Ong Bang Budçla

VII-d

Ong Wreng Wrehaspata

VII-e

Ong Bang Barggawa

Following the Catur-Sandhya : SuSe 76
Sang Hyang Soma-Ädi-ÄvaraI;1a-Nyasa: SuSe 76 - 78

69

70

VIII
VIII-a

Ong A ng A ngga ra

VIII -b

Ong Sang Sanésca ra

VIII- C

Ong M a ng na m a h

VII I-C

Ong R a ng R a hawé

v III-f

Ong Ung na m a h

v lII-d

Ong K a ng K é tawé

VIII-g

Ong Ang na m a h

v lII-a-d

Sa ng H ya ng Som a-Ädi-Ävaral) a-Nyasa (continued ): SuSe 78

71

72

IX
Ix-a

Ong Ang Brahmabé namah

Ix-b

Ong Ung

IX-C

Ong Mang ISwaraya namah

Wai~nyawé

namah

Ixa-c Sang Hyang Tri-Ak~ara Nyasa : SuSe 78

73

74

x
x-a

Ong

x-e

Astra

x-b

Ung

x-f

Atma Tatwätma

x-c

Rah

x-g

K~ama

x-cl

Pha~

x-h

Närastä Muclra

x-a-h

Ungkab Saguan Astra-mantra kabéh : SuSe 46
Plate 1- 3/1
Gelar tikang Tri-Tattva : SuSe 56
Sirat-i Sarïra-nta Toya, Astra-mantra-säclhana : SuSe
[118] plates 16- 17.

x-a-g
x-a-g

Sämpün;a

100,

75

76

XI
XI -a

Bhang Nétra

XI-b

Bhang Nétra

XI -C Ong Ung R ah phat ast ra
XI -d

Amretamudra ya namah

xla-d Ungkab Saguan (continued ) : SuSe 46 Plate 3/2- 3/6, 62
XI-a SuSe Plate 31

77

!IJ
)

",- , ,-

" l ' "tk,1

J.

)w·

78

XII
XII-a

Kadga

XII-d

Pasa

XII-g

Dwaja

XII-b

Oanda

XII-e

Padma

XII-h

Cakra

XII-C

Sangka

xII-f Bajra

XII-l

Trisuia

Mudra kaJaba , Bhuvana Agung: to th e ex terior, to the m a terial world :

SuSe Plate 26.
xII-h,e,i
xII-a-d;f-i
xII- e,f, b,h,d
XII-f,b,h,d

Siro-Viga-ni tekang Sivambha : SuSe 54
Nyasa tang Svara-Vyaiijana ring a~ta-dala­
madhya : SuSe 70
Sivï-karaI:1a Tumüt Sang Hyang Brahmangga-Nyasa : SuSe 74
Sang Hyang Pitr-Ädi-Nyasa ring catur-deSa :

SuSe 76
XII-f,b,d,h
xII-f, b,d, h
c,a,g, l

Sang Hya ng Catur-Sandhya : SuSe 76
Sang Hyang Soma-Ädi-ÄvaraI:1a-Nyasa :

SuSe 76 - 78
XII-i,h, e
xII-b,h,f"

Tri Ak~ara mantra: SuSe 78
Sang H yang Tri-Samaya-Nyasa : SuSe 78

79

I

I

80

XIII
XIII -a

AgnimaI;Jçlala ya namah swaha

xm-b

SuryyamaI;Jçlala ya namah swaha

XIII -C

SomamaI;Jçlala ya namah swaha

XIII-cl

Ong Ong Siwatatwa ya namah
Wiclyatatwa ya namah
Atmatatwa ya namah

XIIIa-c Tri-MaI;Jçlala : SuSe 52
XIII-cl Tri Tattva : SuSe 56, 68, 82, [108]

8\

82

XIV
xlv-a

Ngiliatma

Xlv-b

Nagçli, Sa, skar pucuk, Bang
Ong Sarïraku~çla

XIV-C

MretikaraI:1a, ma. Sa, Kalphika
Ongkaram paramäjnyanam

Xlv-d

Ong Hreng Kawasa

These mudras should be performed with Aowers : SuSe Plate 30
xlva-d SuSe 58 - 62
xlv-a Plate 12 - 13

83

iI

I

84

xv
xv-a

Ong Saniçlya

xv-e

Tang Tatpuru~a

xv-b

Ong Aniroçla

xv-f

Ang Aghora

xv-g

Bang Bamadéwa

xv-h

Sang Saçlya

xv-c
xv-d

Jng ISanä

xv-a-b

Ungkab Saguan (Continued) : SuSe 46, 48, Kara-Sodhananta Muvah : SuSe 48,66
SivI-Karal)a : SuSe 66, 74, [106]

xv-d-h

85

86

XVI
XVI-a

Ang Hredaya

XVI -e

Bhang Nétra

XVI-b

Ang Reng Kaya

XVI-f

Bhang Né tra

XVI-C

Ong Bhurbhuwahswah

XVI-g

Ong Hung Rah phat astra

XVI-d

Ong Hreng Kawica

xVI-a-g

SivI-Karal)a (continued ) : SuSe 68, 74, [106]

87

88

XVII
xVII-a

Sangkä

XVII-d

XVII-b

Wre~ada

XVII-C

XVII-C

Sara

XVII-f

TrihiIa

Hredraya

xVII-g

Kwaca

XVII-h

Qanah

XVII-I

Paras u

Mudra kaj ero, Bhuvana Alit, to the interior, to thc immaterial world :

SuSe Plate 27
XVII a-I
XvlI-f,d,g, b,c
[xVII-f,d,g,b,c

Sang Hyang Nava-Sakti-Nyäsa ring dalamilIa: SuSe 72
Sivï-karaI;la Tumilt Sang Hyang SivänggaNyäsa : SuSe 74
Sivï-karal)a : SuSe 106]

89

Appendix

IJ

Were the Brahmins of Southeast Asia
Brahmins?

The m a in evidence in support of the idea that the brahmins of Southeast
Asia were brahmins is that they were called so. Filliozat (1972: vii ) was suitabl y cautious in putting both ' brahmin' and 'Hindu' within quotation
marks:
En Thailande et au Cambodge il existe une communauté dite de 'brahmanes', spécialisée dans l'accomplissement de rites 'hindous' dans les cérémoni es officielles.
Fillioza t (1965 and 1972) refers to court brahmins who went to Thailand and
Cambodia some time a fter the sixteenth century, taking with them some of
the Agamie traditions of Southeast India discussed in Chapter v and referred to by Filliozat 1965: 243 as 'Agama ou Tantra çivaïtes.' Filliozat has
shown that these ritualists were successors to the domes tic priests (purohita )
of earl ier kings in the sense of being ritual specialists, but that they were
not brahmins. Their direct predecessors in the Tamil country of Southwest
India, th e gurukkal, though sometimes regarded as brahmins there, were
not bra hmins either.
Gonda in his 1970 study on Siva in Indonesia emphasized the importance
of Sa iva ascetics as transmitters of Indi an m a ntras and rites to Indonesia
at a much earlier period. As I m entioned before (page 45), these 'Saiva' ascetics turn out to be Tantrics and include Buddhists. Whatever their precise
affiliation, they were not brahmins either as pointed out long ago by K ern
(1920, IX:259) when he wrote about ' brahmin monks, who should not be
confounded with the Saivite for the latter as such are not brahmins' (brahmaansche monikken, die men niet verwarren moet met Çiwaietische, want deze laatste
zijn als zoodanig geen brahmanen) .

91

In theory, Bali adop~-.:d the triwangsa system th at incorporates the three
highest castes of the so-caJled 'Indian caste system' of four castes: briihmaIJ-a,
k~atriya, vaifya and sildra. Balinese Brahmins are designated with special tities and names such as 'Ida Bagus,' and appropriate designations are similarly reserved for members of the 'Satria' and 'Wesya' castes. After referring
to Lekkerkerker 1926 (a monograph devoted to a comparison of the caste
systems of India and Bali), Goris (1929 = 1984: 293 - 294) surveyed what
was known at the time of his writing about the historical background:
Up to the present no data have been found regarding a triwangsa structure
on Bali before the Majapahit period, or at least before the beginning of
Javanese influence during the reign of Erlangga in the early eleventh century. The Majapahit influence - which does not date merely from the
fall of Majapahit, th us in the late fifteenth century, but was strong from
the time of Ayam Wuruk's reign, th at is to say around 1350 - transformed the direct Hindu-Balinism which had preceded it into a HinduJavanese Balinism.
In the triwangsa system the first caste was that of the Brahmins, from
whose families the padandas came. The second caste was th at of the
kastriyas, whence came the rul ers and their punggawas (originally the
punggawas were all of them relatives of the ruler) [punggawas were court
nobles from whom the Dutch took their 'district officers': FS]. The third
caste was that of the we.ryas. Who were we.ryas onJava and Bali (with the
noble title of gusti ) is not dear. In India they were those merchant gentlemen and large landholders not belonging to the royal family. From
around 1350 on, the other population groups were lumped together as
sildras.
OriginaJly only aJavanese colonist could belong to the trivangsa. As a result of rapid intermarriage with Balinese families, and perhaps of elevation of Balinese families to the nobility by Javanese-Balinese rulers, the
number of triwangsa members, who were at the same time 'men of Majapahit,' expanded swiftly. Many Balinese who had attained something of
a position for themselves attempted (and stiJl attempt) to be elevated to
the nobility, in most cases to the lowest rank, that of gusti.
That much of this information about the caste system is theoretical is dear
from Korn's handbook of Balinese Adat (1924: 70- 74): Balinese society continued to function in the same way as before the alleged introduction of the
Indian caste system. In viJlages, especially, 'members of the higher castes
have no authority' (hebben niets te zeggen ). Geertz and Geertz 1975, though often criticalof Kom, are concerned to show the same, viz., that the Hindu
concept of 'caste' is inappropriate and confusing when applied to Balinese
status distinctions, adding that 'the Balinese themselves, less interested in

92

precision, nonetheless use it to explain their own system to themselves' (p.6)
- all very true apart from the phrase 'less interested in precision' unless it is
also lack of precision th at caused Christians to incorporate the 'Christmas'
tree and 'Easter' eggs.
Much of what Goris and Korn write applies, mutatis mutandis, to India.
Here, too, we should distinguish between a largely theoretical var1}-a system
and the systcm of jäti, the term Indian anthropologists use to refer to the
prese nt-day system which comprises many thousands of castes, differing
from region to region. In India, too, the var1}-a system is invoked to provide
thejäti system with a traditional foundation. The term var1}-a means 'colour'
which has inspired numerous hypotheses about the origin of caste, most of
them predictabie without being persuasive. The term jäti means 'birth'
which expresses th e defining characteristic of thc system in both of its
forms , theoretical and actual. Detailed empirical evidence, most of it contemporary, exists only for thejäti systcm. The evidence for the var1}-a system
is literary: known from the later Vedic period, it is chiefly described in
Manu and other law books composed by brahmins and is primarily concerned not with what existed but with what brahmins believed or wanted
to exist.
The two systems overlap at thc top and diverge increasingly when we
move down the hierarchy. If the majority of present day Indianjätis had to
be classified in terms of the var1}-a system, they would have to be lumped together as ,{adras, just as Goris noted of Bali . At the top of the pyramid, there
is al most total agreement on who is and who is not a brahmin. There has
never been much clarity about ksatriyas. A prince or chieftain could employ a brahmin ritualist as a puralzita and obtain his gatra, thereby confirming or acquiring ksatriya status for himself. If we confine ourselves to the
present ce ntury, many of the more than 600 form er rulers of princely states
claimed that title for themselves and their (often extended ) families, others
did not (e.g., because they were Muslims ) and about others there continued and continues to be controversy or simple uncertainty. The varying relationships between brahmins and ksatriyas constitute one of the enduring
fea tures of Indian social history and left their traces in Southeast Asia. The
paradigm cases are that of the ksatriya king, who wields political exec utive
power, and his brahmin minister, whose expertise is ritual and legal (for
Bali: cf. Geertz and Geertz 1975: 29); and the great ksatriya systems of
Mahavira and Buddha which challenged the traditional authority of the
Vedas that had always been maintained and controlled by brahmins.
The position of the two highcst castcs is refl ec ted by caste legitimation:

(I) there is no known process by which a non-brahmin can become a
brahmin, unless he can prove that he actually is one, a rare but by no
means non-existent occurrence sincc brahmins may be able to demon-

93

strate, for example, that their ancestors had been brahmins who had be18
come Muslims or Christians.
(2) there are processes by which non-ksatriyas can become ksatriyas:
these are precisely the ritual means discussed by Kulke el al. by which
brahmins provide legi timation to rul ers-already-in-power or aspiring to
power.
In brief: non-brahmins cannot become brahmins, and non-ksatriyas can become ksatriyas but only with the help of brahmins.
Why is there ha rdly any controversy about who is or is not a brahmin,
and why do non-brahmins not become or pretend to be brahmins? The answer is threefold: (I) because brahmins are not isolated but part of their
society; (2) because of the numerous details of ritual knowledge that a brahmin possesses; and (3) because of penalties, e.g., the death penalty (also in
Bali: Korn 1924: 83). Of course, there are ignorant brahmins (Sanskrit art
and literature is replete with them and they occurred al ready in Vedic ritual: Staal 1978): but they can only be brahmins if they are members of
brahmin communities th at accept them as such and if they knowat least a
minimum (e.g., the Gäyatrï mantra or the beginning lines of the Vedic
school to which they belong by birth).
India is replete with attempts, successful a nd unsuccessful, of castes raising their status or being forced to lower it, but it is not only theoretically
but also practically almost impossible to become a brahmin. Uncertainty is
another matter, as in the story of the Upani~adic teacher who asked a prospective pupil about his parents: the boy answered that his mother had
told him th at she knew many men but did not know who was his fat her.
The teacher declared: he who spe aks thus truthfully is a brahmin: you are
admitted. Go and collect the fire-sticks!
It is difficult to become a bra hmin not only because of context, penalties
a nd expert knowiedge, but also on account of the details of ritua l affiliation. A brahmin belongs by birth to a particular school or bra nch (fiikhii)
of a Veda and to a particular ritual sillra within that branch. Many South
Indian brahmins, for example, belong to the Äpastamba sillra of the Taittirïya siikhii of the Kf~ 9a Yajurveda. Of greater socia l significance is the golra
or exogamic unit tha t determines which brahmin a brahmin may not marry
(i.e., one of the same gotra). A brahmin possesses such information about

18 In K erala, early in the ce ntury, controversy arose arou nd a Saivite temple located within
the large compound of a wealthy Muslim landow ner. Property acts of the temple were acce pted as evidence th at his a ncestors had bee n brahmins. Appropriate rites re-instituted
him as a brahmin and enabled him to marry a brahmin girl. But the bridegroom a nd his
bride were murdered , a llegedly by his form er co-religionists.

94

ritu a l affiliation because it has to be recited on numero us ritua l occasions.
The most importa nt of these and the first is initiation into the bra hmin
cas te o r upanayana, the 'second birth' when a boy becomes a brahmin (a nd
a nalogously, at least in th eory, for ksatriya a nd vaisya ). During thi s ceremony, the offi cia ting priest whispers into his ea r the Gäyatrï mantra which
he has to continu e to recite d a il y during sandhya-vandana for the rest of his
life (or until he 'renounces,' a rare eve nt to which we shall return ). At the
time of upanayana, the boy receives the yajizopavfta or 'sacred thread,' the prima ry mark by which one recogni zes members of the bra hmin community
who continu e to be shirtIess, especia ll y in rura l areas and not only because
of the cliOlate.
At prese nt, there a re many brahmins, especially in cities and in North Indi a, who do not know their Vedic affi li a tions. But there are few who have
not undergone som e kind of upanayana, without which they would not be
bra hmins, who do not wear the sacred thread or observe the golra rul es insofar as they m arry within the caste at a ll. Since upanayana is, like all rituals,
a relativcly costl y a/fair and many brahmins a re poor, group upanayana perform a nces have been introdu ced recentl y.
Wh ether th is rough sketch correctly port rays the present situ at ion or
needs qu alification, it is safe to assume tha t the further we go back in time,
the stronger were brahmin ties a nd traditions a nd the more commo nl y
ava il able such types o/ïnform ation must have been among them.
The learn ing of brahmins pertains primarily to the Vedas a nd is mostl y
confined to features of ritual. The Vedänta, or 'end of th e Vedas,' and simil ar philosophies with the exce ption of the MïmäJT1sä (cf. note I), are not
co nfined to brahmins, and neither is the bulk of Sanskrit literature and
classical Indi an civili zation, to which, a long with brahmins, important
contributions were m ade by members of other castes, J a inas, Buddhists,
T antri cs, Saivites, Vai~t:lavites a nd ot her sec taria ns, a nd in more recent
times even Muslims and Christians. Bra hmins are not agents of Sanskritization a nd Sanskrit culture is not their excl usive property (cf. Staal 1963).
This is importa nt in our context: th at Sanskrit grammar was known in Indonesia, where Chinese Buddhist monks took language courses on th eir
way to Indi a, or th a t the inscriptions from Cambodia are in exce llent Sanskrit, better th a n m a ny from Indi a, for example, does not impl y th at Sou theast Asian experts or a uthors of Sanskrit must have been bra hmins.
Apart from not being the excl usive agents of Sanskritization, bra hmins
a re a lso not lilerale specialists as a t least one anthropologist has claimed
(Goody 1987) - a fa r-fetched supposition in view of the fact that the transmission of the Vedas a nd most of the bra hmin's specia lised know ledge is exclusively oral (Staal 1986c, 1989). In sum , brahmins arc not Sanskritic or literate ex perts; they a rc ritua l ex perts.
During recent ce nturi es, Vedic traditions have been much stronge r in

95

South than in North India where all South Indian brahmins originally
came from. That holds true ofTamilnadu as it does of Andhra, Karnataka
and Kerala. It is true that the Southern 'Vaidikas' form sm all, often tiny
minorities, but they are linked through ritual, marriage and other social
links to the brahmin majorities. Even isolated communities (such as the
Coriya of Tamilnadu) often preserve rare Vedic schools and traditions
(such as theJaiminlya of the Samaveda).
The brahmin traditions are very largely oral and of such complexity that
it is unlikely that there has at any time been anything like a large-scale
adoption of Vedic traditions by non-brahmins. Adoption by individuals
could have taken place more easily and Vedic traditions could have been
transmitted to an adopted son who was educated in a brahmin household
practically from birth. The continued existence of Vedic traditions can
only be accounted for by the assumption that there was a continuous transmission of knowIedge, from teacher to pupil, often from father to son, into
which the young were initiated at an early age and which they continued
to cultivate throughout much of their adult lives.
The diffusion of Vedic ritual knowledge is confined to brahmins but is
subject to further restrictions within the brahmin cas te. A recent illustration comes from the performance tradition of large Vedic rituals, which
have always required sixteen officiants including jour brahmins from the
Samaveda. The Samaveda is rare in all parts of India and in Kerala, about
half a century ago, there was serious concern about the paucity of trained
Samavedins since it was difficult to find even these four. The more numerous Rigvedins suggested that some of their sons undergo Samaveda training; but the Samavedins refused to teach Samaveda to other brahmins, not
out of ill-will but because the Rigvedins had not undergone the particular
Samavedic form of upanayana.
Leaving India and barring details to which we shall return, the overall
picture is clear: in Bali, the entire ritual edifice erected by the brahmins of
India is conspicuous by its absence.
It is conceivable that brahmins lost Vedic paraphernalia that in India
might be regarded as essen ti al but overseas as superfluous. After all, many
Indian brahmins have lost their Vedic heritage and become cooks, taxi drivers, administrators, stenographers and scientists without ceasing to be
brahmins. However, there is a difference. None of these modern specialists
need ritual in their profession. The brahmins of Southeast Asia, on the
other hand, went there allegedly as ritual specialists. It would have made
little sense for them to cut off the ritual roots from which they derived their
position, authority and influence.
It is always assumed that the brahmin settlers of Southeast Asia, after
crossing the ocean, married indigenous women. Both crossing the ocean
and marrying non-brahmins seem to conflict with the classical rules and

96

laws of bra hmin society. Bernet Kempers (193T 6- 7) glosses ove r the first
problem but faces th e second squa rely:
The fac t that Bra hm a ns have come to Indonesia has puzz led m a ny histori ans as we know from the sacrcd texts tha t Hindus a re not allowed to
travel by sea. But 'm en a re a lways caught by historians in the very ac t of
belying their principles by their acti ons.'
... the supposition is upon the surface th at the India ns m a rried the d aughters of the soil. We must, however, kee p in mind, tha t we know no thing
about this earli es t evolution.
Wheatley (1982: 20) has referred to th eories a bout what happened without
specifying how it happened on the assumpti on tha t evidence is no longer
available, as black box modeis. It is a n apt ch arac terization of a common
scientific procedure, but Wheatley's own illustra tions of ' first intima tions'
a nd 'first glimpses' inside the box a re unpersuasive: Bosch' discussion of
Saiva Siddhä nta overemphasized the philosophic, a nd Wolters' 'men ofprowess' arose from a confusion between Sa iva Ägam as a nd devo tiona l bhakti
movements th at extol the grace ofVi ~ Q.u (if supermen were needed it would
be easier to locate them in Ta ntrism where the practiti oner is often referred
to as vlra, littera lly, 'ma le hero' ). Bosch a nd Wolters paid insufficient a ttention to the fact th at the Saiv a Ägam as a nd T antrism in ge neral deal prim a ril y wi th ritu al.
And yet, without m enti oning it, both Bosch a nd Wolters pointed in the
right direction: Ta ntra a nd Ägama help to explain tha t South a nd Southeast Asians looked in new direc ti ons. M oreove r, the black box contains not
onl y unsolved m a rri ages a nd sea voyages but a lso a third difficulty tha t logicall y precedes them: for if we can solvc it we m ay be able to solve the
others. Though the French a nthropologist Louis Dumont has expressed it
perhaps m os t clea rl y, it is wel l known th a t the brahmins of Indi a a re (or
were until rece ntly) the people mos t comfortably placed in their society.
Our first questi on must therefore be, why would a bra hmin leave Indi a
a nd engage in prohibited ac ts? Werc there specific reasons a t home? C ould
th ere have bee n particul a rly attrac ti ve offers from overseas?
As for specific reasons a t hom e, scvera l may be imagined. They include
caste exclusion because of crimes or misdeeds of individu als, as weil as structura l reaso ns. I am famili ar with only one case of groups of Indi an bra hmins being excluded from th e Vedi c traditi on. Among the Nambudiri bra hmins of K era la, two sub-castes have bee n excluded (they a re called, in
M a layalam , otlillatla 'non-cha nting' ) because they were polluted by being
in contac t with blood. The first sub-cas te consists of bra hmins who becam e
warriors. The second compri ses eight fa milies of traditi ona l physicians
(a!!avaidyan ). In Ba li, brahmins simila rl y 'e mbraced Sa tri a ideals' and some

97

were warnors (Rubinstein 1991: 61, 69); but they were not similarly excluded.
Marriage alliances with non-brahmins are not absent from Sanskrit literature and they are recognized by the law books provided they are in accordance with the one principle that governs mixed marriage: they must
be anuloma, 'moving along with the growth of the hair', i.e., the male must
belong to the higher caste. Intercaste marriages especially of a brahmin
male with a ksatriya or vaisya female are known from the Vedas onward
and anuloma marriages in general were freely allowed until the ninth century A.D. (Kane 1941, VOl.II, Part I, 447 sq.). Inscriptions from Kerala first
prohibited such marriage alliances with wives of tenants, but later recognized the system that is still unique there (Narayanan and Veluthat 1983:
261 - 263): in th at system, only the oldest son of a brahmin is allowed to marry within his caste through the traditional Vedic marriage ritual referred
to as vivaha; the younger sons are only permitted alliances with non-brahmin women through what are called sambandham relationships. This system
works because it is in accordance with a special feature of the Kerala caste
system: if we exclude some of the allegedly ksatriya nobles and a few rare
'intermediate' castes to which I shall return in a moment, the highest and
most important non-brahmin castes of Kerala, specifically the Nayars, are
matrilinear - that is, children inherit from the mother, including her caste.
In the case of a sambandham alliance of a brahmin man with a Nayar woman, the offspring are not brahmins but Nayars - aresuIt that accords
with the non-identical caste rules of both parents. In Kerala, therefore,
only the oldest son of a brahmin preserves the Vedic traditions characteristic of the brahmin cas te.
There is some similarity between this Kerala system and what in Bali has
been called the 'Principle of Sinking Status' (Geertz and Geertz 1975:
124- (31 ). The rule of anuloma occurs in Bali: 'Although the texts do not mention it, a Brahmana man may marry women from other descent groups ...
However, if Brahmana women marry into other descent groups, they ce ase
to be Brahmana' (Rubinstein: 1991: 59 - 60). Hooykaas (1964: 35 - 36) writes
about brahmin women: 'The craft of offering making forms for them a suitable means of livelihood wh en they remain unmarried, for whereas brahmins may, and often do, marry non-brahmins, this is still virtually impossibie for the brahmin women, who then have to earn their own living. Their
function, as the makers of offerings and as intermediaries between the griya
and the pura, the tempie, is probably very ancient.'
In Kerala such functions are not open to brahmin women, but a group of
sub-castes is specifically concerned with occupations relating to the tempie.
lts members are referred to as ambalavasi, ' temple dweIlers' or antarala, 'inbetweeners' since some were the offspring of mixed marriages with brahmin fathers. One of these sub-castes deals with the preparation of flower of-

98

ferings and garlands; their members are call ed pu!pakan from PU!jJa, 'flow er'
(Thurston 1909: 28 - 29; Anantha Krishna lyer 1912, I: 133- 134).
I mention these Keral a specifics not because I feel tha t there are special
connections between lndonesia a nd K eral a but because I happen to be familiar with them. However, Levi (1933: XIX ) m entioned that he found mantras similar to the Balinese in the Ïsanasivagurudeva -paddlzati, the Tantrasa muccaya (' Tattvasamuccaya' must be am isprint ) a nd the ParasuramakaLpa, a ll
T a ntric works from Keral a. These connec tions shou ld be pursued furth er
when K eral a T antri sm becomes better known .,g
The structure of the cas te system in a particul a r region may ex plain why
some sons ofbrahmin fath ers cease to be bra hmins. But why should an individual brahmin give up his caste willingly? There is a general answer to
this question: because of the desire for renunciation, an option especially attrac tive to non-bra hmins but nevertheless adopted by brahmins throughout Indi an history. Dumont (1959, 1966) has argued tha t th e reason for renunciation is tha t it enables cas te-m embers to become individuals. The
underlying assumption is th at 'individuality,' a llegedl y a characte ri stic feature of Europeans, is absent from members of a traditional caste hi erarchy.
I don't know wh ether th is in triguing idea is correct: I know many Indian individuals and they do not seem to be rare in c1assical Sanskrit literature. Be
th is as it may, there is little doubt th at the idea of renunciation is an important feature of Indi an thought. Beginning during the end of the Vedas, or
Upani~ads, it has become increasingly common to denounce ritual a nd
caste and recommend renunciation 'from the world,' i. e., from the society
of fa mily, vi ll age and caste with their concomitant ritual s. This goal was advocated by J ainism and Buddhism and invaded the Vedic traditions. And
yet, ritua l a nd caste were often not rej ected but m erely transform ed as the
renouncers created new 'parall el societies' (as Romila Thapar called them ;
see also H ees terma n 1985: 42 sq.). Buddhists andJainas introduced rites for
becoming a monk that a re reminiscent of upanayana. The monks themselves
officiated at fun eral rites for th e m embers of the higher castes whereas brahmin ri tual experts co ntinued to do so a t a ll other life-cycle rites. The antiritual act of renunciation itself came to be celebrated by a rite model ed
after funeral ritual.
Caste and ritual continued in some form or other through most innovati ons. The majority of ea rl y Buddhists themselves came from the higher
castes, especia lly the bra hmin. One of the first important bra hmins who becam e a Buddhist was Mah a kasyapa, a direct pupil of Buddha and an important conservative voice in ea rl y Buddhism . Yoga, in its many forms,

'9 A project o n K e rala T ant ri sm is presently underway and in vo lvcs stlld y of the living tradition as we il as tex ts slI(' h as Tan lrnmmuccaya , Ïsanrdivagumdeva/Jaddhali and Se~asamuccaya.

99

also appealed to brahmins. According to legend, the famous philosopher
Sailkara celebrated the rite of renunciation when he was still young, possibly having fall en under the spellof a Yogin (cf. Staal '995). With the development of Tantrism, new alternatives became available and a brahmin
might feel that Tantric methods were more effective than the traditional,
whatever the tradition (cf. Gupta et al. '979: 30). Tantrism introduced new
or partly new rites such as dfk~ti initiation, a term used in Vedic ritual for
the initiation of the ritua l patron or yajamtina.
In sum, both brahmins and non-brahmins were interested in the many
other options that existed outside the traditional cas te system, including
those that could be combi ned with the adherence to (some form of) caste.
The teachings of the Bhagavad GHa, for example, have to be primarily understood in such a context: they advocate the performance of traditional
cas te duties (varr:za-dharma ) without attachment to their alleged fruits - a
cautious attack not on the system of caste itself but on some of its inherent
values. Tantrics went much further, metaphorically and actually: they
were not tied to caste or the Indian soil and could travel as they pleased .
If either brahmins or Tantrics transmitted Indian knowledge beyond Indian borders, marriages or marriage-like a lliances with non-Indians are
likely to have taken place. Not necessarily so, for the more orthodox (nonTantric) form s of Buddhism were transmitted by non-marrying monks and
Tantrics such as Gonda's Saivite ascetics need not have been married
either. There are non-Buddhist, including brahmin paralleIs from India,
the latter Buddhist inspired : the Advaita Vedanta tradition is transmitted
through lineages of originally brahmin Sankaracaryas who never married
and became renouncers a t an early stage of life, indicating their successor
by simple choice when they feit the time was right.
Many of these facts about the Indian caste system provide no more than
circumstanti al evidence concerning the general question of the brahmins of
Southeast Asia. However, as far as Bali is concerned, we can now be more
specific: there is no evidence there of the upanayana initiation into brahminhood , the sacred thread, exogamic go tras or marriage restrictions and,
above all, an almost total absence of Vedic mantras or anything else pertaining to Vedic traditions. The mantras found in Bali are largely Tantric
as is the consecration of the padanda insofar as it is not Balinese. That latter
ceremony has several names, including mediksa (cf. Korn '928 = '984:
'3' - 153) which again is Tantric. Balinese ceremoni es display a mixture of
ritual and yoga-like meditation which is, as we have seen, a characteristic
feature ofTantrism. Many of the specifically brahmin terms - upanayana, gotra , ftikhti, etc. - do not occur in Indonesia or occur in other senses (Gonda
'952; Ensink and van Buitenen 1964). The term yajiiopavfta does occur in
mant ras (SuSe 126, 180; cf. Gonda 1952: 167) but this is typical and does not
imply that the ritualists used at any time the 'sacred thread' of the upanaya-

100

na - unlike the sirovi~!a 'head-ba nd ' which does not onl y occur in m a ntras
but which the padanda uses a lthough it does not occur in any brahma nic
rite. These facts suggest th a t most of the so-called Ba linese brahmins were
T antrics of various a ffili ations and persuasions, Buddhist as weil as nonBuddhist. They may have included a few of partial a nd more or less distant
bra hmin origins a nd others pretending to be bra hmins or la ter looked
upon as such. The position they occ upi ed was and still is similar to the
position of brahmins (at least, until recently ) in Indi a : they continue to be
patrilinear ritual ex perts with knowledge of m a ntras and a high ritual and
socia l status, advisers of princes a nd others and comfortably placed in their
society. They were a lso conce rned with their sta tus as bra hmins
(kabrahmanan; cf. Rubinstein 1991 ); but they were not brahmins.
Between Indi a and the mainland of Southeast Asia the prohibited seatrave! would not have been necessary. Even so, the court or 'Buddhist brahmins' of Thailand and Cambodia, already m entioned , crossed the sea from
Southeast Indi a though it happened only a few ce nturies ago. Like the brahmins of Bali, they lack Vedic m a ntras, upanayana, the sacred thread and gotras, not to mention more exo ti c Vedic paraphernalia. Unlike their Ba linese
counterparts, they possess no t only Sanskrit but also Tamil tex ts (Sarma
1972). As we have already see n, it is likely th at neither they nor the Saivite
ascetics of I ndon esia were brahmins. Earlier and on the mainl a nd of Sou theast Asia, a brahmin presence may have been more probable. The South India n brahmin who belonged to the làittirfya school according to a seventh
century Cambodian inscription (Bha ttacharya 1961: 131 note I) is likely to
have been a brahmin. The use of Vedic ritua l terms a nd th e reference to a
(post-Vedic) brahmayaJiia during which allegedly Vedic and other tex ts were
recited (ibid. 148- 150), on the other hand, prove little and Bhattacharya
comments that ' les rites proprement védiques n'ontjoué aucun rale au Cambodge.' It see ms safe to conclude that the la rge m aj ority of the so-called
bra hmins of Southeast Asia were not brahmins.

101

Bibliography

Anantha Krishna I yer, L.K. (1912), The Cochin Tribes and Castes, Vol.x , Madras: Higginbotham & Co.jLondon: Luzac & Co.
Baal, ]. van (1947- 48), review ofSchärer 1946, Indonesiii 1:9 1 ff.
Bakker, F.L. (1993), The Struggle rifthe Hindu Balinese Intellectuals: Developments
in Modern Hindu Thinking in Independent Indonesia, Amsterdam: vu University Press
BALI: Studies in LiJe, Thought and Ritual (1984), Dordrecht: Foris Publications
Barraud, C. and Platenkamp, ].D.M. (eds.) (1989- 1990), Rituals and sociocosmic order in Eastern Indonesian Societies, Bijdragen van het Koninklijk Instituut
voor Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde, 145,4 and 146,1.
Bateson, Gregory a nd Mead, M a rgaret (1942), Balinese Character. A Photographic Anarysis, Ncw Vork: The Academy
Belo, Jane (1953), Bali: Temple Festival, New Vork: Monographs of the American Ethnological Society XXII
Bernet Kempers, AJ. (1937), Cultural Relations between India and Java, Calcutta: The University
Bernet Kempers, A.]. (1991 ), Monumental Bali: Introduction to Balinese Archaeology and Guide to the Monuments, Bcrkeleyj Singapore: Periplus Editions
Bhattacharya, K a mal eswar (1961 ), Les Religions Brahmaniques dans l'Ancien
Cambodge, Paris: Publications de l'École Franaise d'Extrème-Orient XLIX
Bodewitz, H .W. (1993), J a n Gond a,' K NAW Levensberichten en Herdenkingen
1992, Amsterdam: North-Ho ll a nd Publishing Company, 7- 15
Bosch, F.D.K. (1946 = 1961 ), ' Problems of the Hindu Colonization of Indonesia' in Selected Studies in Indonesian Archaeology, Den Haag: M a rtinus
Nijhoff: 1- 21
Brinkgreve, Francine (1992), Offerings. The ritual art rif Bali. Photos by D avid
Stuart-Fox et al., Sanur Bali: Image Network Indonesia

103

Brunner, Hélène (1967), 'A propos d'un rituel balinais,' Journal asiatique 255:
40 9- 4 22
Brunner, Hélène (1977), 'Importance de la littérature ägamique pour l'étude
des religions vivantes de l'Inde,' Indologica Taurinensia lil-IV: 107- 124
Brunner, Hélène (1986), 'Les membres de Siva,' Asiatische StudienjÉtudes Asiatiques 40: 89- 132
Brunner, Hélène (1994), 'The Place of Yoga in the Saivägamas,' Pandit NR.
Bhatt Felicitation Volume, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, pp. 425 - 461 (page
452: 'the Saiva ritual is through and through penetrated by yoga')
Burkert, Walter (1979), Structure and History in Greek Mythology and Ritual, Berkeley: University of California
Casparis, JG. de (1983), India and Maritime South East Asia: A Lasting Relationship, Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya
Coedès, Georges (1944), Histoire ancienne des états hindouisés d'Extrême Grient,
Paris
Col as, Gérard (1988), 'Le yoga de l'officiant vaikhänasa,' Journal asiatique
27 6: 245 - 28 3
Crucq, K.c. (1928), Bijdrage tot de kennis van het Balisch doodenritueel, Santpoort: c.A. Mees
Deshpande, Madhav M. (1993), Sanskrit and Prakrit: Sociolinguistic Issues, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Diehl, Carl Gustav (1956), Instrument and Purpose: Studies on Ries and Rituals in
South India, Lund: Gleerups
Dumont, Louis (1959), 'Le renoncement dans les religions de I'lnde,' Archives
de sociologie des religions 7:45 - 69
Dumont, Louis (1966), Homo hierarchicus: Essai sur Ie système des castes, Paris
Dyson, Freeman (1988), Irifinite in All Directions, New Vork: The Author
Einoo, Shingo (1993a), 'Who is the Performer of the saT(ldhyopiisanii?' Wiener
Zeitschriftfür die Kunde Südasiens, Supplementband 36: 59- 67
Einoo, Shingo (1993b), 'Changes in Hindu Ritual with a Focus on the
Morning Service,' in Nagano and Ikari: 197- 237
Ensink, J and van Buitenen, JA.B. (1964), 'Glossary of Sanskrit from Indonesia,' Viik 6: I - VIII, 1- 219
Filliozat, Jean (1965), 'Kailäsaparamparä,' Felicitation Volumes rif Southeast
Asian Studies presented to His Highness Prince Dhaninivat Kromamun Bidyalabh
Bridhyakorn, Bangkok: The Siam Society, 11:241- 247
Fox,JJ (1988), To Speak in Pairs. Essays on the Ritual Language rif Eastern Indonesia, Cambridge: University Press
Geertz, Clifford (1980), Negara, The Theatre State in Nineteenth-Century Bali,
Princeton: University Press
Geertz, H. (ed.) (1991 ), State and Society in Bali, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
Geertz, H. and C. (1975), Kinship in Bali, Chicago

104

Gonda, j. (1952), Sanskrit in Indonesia, Nagpur: Sarasvati Vihara Series
XXVIII

Gonda,j. (1970), 'Siva in Indonesien,' Wiener Zeitschriftfür die Kunde Südasiens
14: 1- 3 1
Gonda, j. (1975), The Indian Religions in Pre-Islamic Indonesia and their Survival
in Bali, Leiden(Köln: E.j. Brill
Gonda, j. (1977), Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit, Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz
Gonda, j. (1979), 'C hristiaan Hooykaas,' KNAW Jaarboek, Amsterdam:
North-Holland Publishing Company, 204- 207
Gonda, j. (1980), Vedic Ritua!. The non-solemn rites, Leiden(Köln: E.j. Brill
Goris, R. (1926), Bijdrage tot de kennis der Oud-Javaanse/ze en Balineesche theologie,
Leiden: A. Vros
Goris, R. (1929, 1960, 1984), 'The Position of the Blacksmiths,' in BALI:
28 9 - 299
Goris, R. (1938,1960, 1984), 'TheTemple System,' in BALI: 103 - 11 (excerpt)
Goris, R. (1954), Prasasti Bali: Inscripties voor Anak Wungcu, 1-11, Bandung:
Masa Baru
Goudriaan, Teun (ed .) (1992), Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism . Studies
in Honor rif André Padoux, Albany: State University ofNew Vork Press
Goudriaan, T. a nd Hooykaas, e. (1971 ), Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Saiva and
Vaipzava) rif Balinese Brahman Priests, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd. Letterkunde, nieuwe reeks: xx/x, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company
Grader, CJ. (1939, 1960, 1984), 'The Irrigation Systcm in the Region of
J embrana,' in BALI: 269 288
Grader, CJ. (1970), 'Ekadacarudra: H et honderjaarlijks landreinigingsritueel,' in: Liber Amicorum E.M.A.A.]. Allard, Nijmegen: Katholieke Universiteit: 75 - 10 4
Gupta, Sanjukta, Hoens, Dirk Jan and Goudriaan, Teun (1979), Hindu
Tantrism, Leiden( Koln: E.j. Brill
Hardeland, A. (1858), Versuch einer Grammatik der Dajackschen Sprache, Amsterdam: Frederik Muller
H eekeren, H .R. van (1955), ' Proto-Historic Sarcophagi on Bali,' Berira Dinas
Purbakala 2
H eesterman, j.e. (1985), The Inner Coriflict rif Tradition. Essays in Indian Ritual,
Kingship and Sociery, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press
Hinzler, H.I.R. (1988), 'On Balinese name-giving rituals,' in: Papersfrom the
Third European Colloquium on Malay and Indonesian Studies, Napoli: 121 - 146
Hooykaas, e. (1963), 'Bauddha Brahmins in Bali,' Bulletin rif the School of
Oriental and African Studies 26: 544 - 550
Hooykaas, e. (1964), Agama-Tïrtha. Five Studies in Hindu-Balinese Religion,
Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afd.

105

Letterkunde, meuwe reeks: 70/4, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing
Company
Hooykaas, C. (1965), 'Buddhism in Bali,' FeLicitation Volumes rif Southeast Asian
Studies presented to His Highness Prince Dhaninivat Kromamun Bidyalabh Bridhyakorn, Bangkok: The Siam Society, I: 25 - 33
Hooykaas, C. (1966), Sflrya-Sevana. The Way to God rif a Balinese Priest, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, AJd. Letterkunde, nieuwe reeks: 72/3, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company = SuSe
Hooykaas, C. (1973), Balinese Bauddha Brahmans, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, AJd. Letterkunde, nieuwe reeks: 80,
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company
Hooykaas, C. (1974), Cosmogorry and Creation in Balinese Tradition, The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff
Hooykaas, C. (1977), A Balinese Temple Festival, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
Hooykaas, C. (1983a), 'Homa in India and Bali,' in Strickmann n: 512 - 591
Hooykaas, C. (1983b), 'Agni Offerings inJava and Bali,' in Staal II: 382 - 402
Hooykaas-van Leeuwen Boomkamp, JH. (1961 ), Ritual Purification rif a Balinese Temple, Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, AJd. Letterkunde, nieuwe reeks: 86/4, Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Company
Ikari, Yasuke and Arnold, Harold (transl.) (1983), Baudhayana's Srautasfltra on
the Agnicayana, in Staal II: 478- 675
Juynboll, H.H. (191 I), Supplement op den Catalogus der Javaansche en Madoereesche
Handschriften der Leidsche UniversititsbibLiotheek, II, Leiden: EJ. Bril!
Kane, P.V (1941 ), History oJ Dharmasästra, Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
Kat Angelino, P. de (1921 ), 'De leak op Bali,' Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-,
Land- en Volkenkunde 60: 1- 44
Kat Angelino, P. de (1922), Mudra's op Bali: handhoudingen der priesters, illustrations by Tyra de Kleen, 's-Gravenhage: Adi Poestaka
Kat Angelino, P. de (1923), Mudras auJ Bali: Handhaltungen der Priester, ill.
Tyra de Kleen, Hagen i.W.: Folkwang Verlag
Kern, H . (1920), Verspreide Geschriften, IX, 's-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff
Kleen, Tyra de (1924), Mudras, the Ritual Hand-poses rif the Buddha priests and the
Shiva priests rif Bali, London: Kegan Paul
Kooiman, Dick, van den Muijzenberg, Otto & van der Veer, Peter (eds.)
(1984), Conversion, competition and conflict. Essays on the role rif religion in Asia,
Amsterdam: Free University Press
Kom, VE. (1924), Het adatrecht van Bali, 's-Gravenhage: Handelsdrukkerij
'De Ster'
Kom, VE. (1932, 1960, 1984), 'The Consecration of a Priest' in BALI:
13 1- 153

106

Kom, VE. (1933), De dorpsrepubliek Tnganan Pagringsingan, Santpoort: 1933
Krom, N.J. (1924), 'Over het Çiwaisme van Midden-Java,' M ededelingen der
Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afdeling Letterkunde, 58, B/8: 199- 225
Kulke, H ermann (1986), 'Max Weber's contribution to the study of 'Hinduization' in 1ndia and ' I ndi a niz ation' in Southeast Asia,' in:
D. Kantwosky (ed.) Recent Research on Max Weber's Studies rif Hinduism,
Munchen: Weltforum Verlag, 97- 116
Kulke, Hermann (1990), ' Indian Colonies, Indianization or Cultural Convergence? R eft ections on the Changing Image of India's Role in Sou thEast Asia,' in: Schulte Nordholt: 8 32
Lekkerkerker, C. (1926), 'De kastenmaatschappij in Britsch-Indië en op
Bali,' Mensch en Maatschappij 2: 175 - 213,300 - 334
Leur, J C. van (1955), Indonesian Trade and Society. Essays in Asian Social and
Economic History, The Hague: Van Hoeve
Levi, Sylvain (1933), Sanskrit Texts from Bali, Baroda: Gaekwad Oriental
Seri es 68
Mallory, JP. (1989), In Search rif the Indo-Europans: Language, Archaeology and
Myth, London
Masica, Colin P. (1991 ), The Indo-A ryan Languages, Cambridge: University
Press
Melikian, Sauren (1995), 'A SecOlld G eneration Unraveling Enigmas of
Thai Art History,' International Herald TribuneJun e 3- 4: 7
Miller, D.B. (1984), ' Hinduism in Perspective: Bali and India Compared,'
Review rif Indonesian and Malaysian Jljfairs 18: 36 - 63
Moens, JL. (1925), Het Buddhisme op Java en Sumatra in zijn laatste Bloeiperiode,
Batavia
Mori, Masahide (1990), 'Water in the Tantric Buddhist Rituals in India,'
Bulletin rif the National Museum of Ethnology, 15/4: 101 3- 1047
Nagano, Yasuhiko a nd Ikari, Yasuke (eds.) (1993), From Vedic Altar to Village
Shrine, Osaka: National Museum of Ethnology
Naipau l, VS. (1990), India, A Million Mutinies Now, New Vork: Viking
Narayanan, M.G.S. and Veluthat, K esavan (1983), 'A History of the Nambudiri Community of Kerala,' in Staal II: 256 - 278
Needham, Rodney (1967), 'Percussion and Transition', Man, n.S.2: 606- 614
Nihom, Max (1994), Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism. Th e
Kuiijarakan:zadharmakathana and the Yogatantra, Vi enna: Publica tions of the
De Nobili R esea rch Library
Payne, Rich a rd (1990), Feeding the Gods: The Shingon Fire Ritual, New Delhi:
Satapi~aka
Quarles van U fford, Ph. & Schoftdeers (eds.) (1988), Religion and Development,
Amsterdam: Free University Press
R enou, Louis (1941 - 1942), 'Les connex ions entre Ie rituel et la grammaire
en sanskrit,' Journal asiatique 233: 105 - 165

107

Renou, Louis (1953), Religions rif Ancient India, London: The Athlone Press
Renou, Louis and Silburn, L. (1954), 'Nirukta and ánirukta in Vedic,' in:
Sarupa Bharati, Lakshman Sarup Memorial Volume, Hoshiarpur
Rubinstein, R. (1991), 'The Brahmana according to their Babad,' in Geertz:
43 - 84
Sarma, Neelakanta (1972), Textes sanskrits et tamouls de Thailande, Introduction
par J ean Filliozat, Pondichéry: Institut français d'lndologie
Schärer, Hans (1946), Die Gottesidee der Ngadju Dajak in Süd-Borneo, Leiden:
E.J Brill
Schärer, Hans (1963), Ngaju Religion. The Conception rif God rif a South Borneo
People, trans!. Rodney Needham, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
Schärer, Hans (1966), Der Totenkult der Ngadju Dajak in Süd-Borneo. Mythen zum
Totenkult und die Texte zum Tantolak Matei, I. Mythen z um Totenkult 11. Handlungen und Texte zum Totenkult, 's-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff
Schipper, Kristofer and Staal, Frits (forthcoming ), Veda and Tao: Two Ritual
Traditions
Schopen, Gregory (1991 ), 'Archaeology and Protestant Presuppositions in
the Study of Indian Buddhism,' History rif Religions 31: I - 23
Schul te Nordholt, H.G.C. (1981 ), 'Negara: A Theatre State?' Bij"dragen tot de
Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde 137: 470- 476
Schulte Nordholt, H.G.G (ed.) (1990), Onderzoek in Zuid-Oost-Aziif, Leiden:
Vakgroep Talen en Culturen van Zuidoost-Azie en Oceanie = Semaian 3
Schulte Nordholt, H. (1991 ), State, Village and Ritual in Bali, Amsterdam: vu
University Press
Schuster, Carl and Carpenter, Edmund (1986), Social Symbolism in Ancient and
Tribal Art. A Record rif Tradition and Continuity, New Vork: Rock Foundation
Skorupski, Tadeusz (1983), 'Tibetan Homa Rites,' in Staal, II: 4°3-417
Smith, R.B. and Watson, W. (eds.) (1979), Early Southeast Asia. Essays in Archeology, History and Historical Geography, New Vork: Oxford University Press
Snoy, P. (1983), Ethnologie und Geschichte: FestschriJt Jur Kar! ]ettmar, Wiesbaden: Steiner
Soebadio, Haryati (ed.), (1971 ), ]fiiinasiddhiinta, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
Soejono, R.P. (1969), 'On Prehistorie Burial Methods in Indonesia,' Berira
Dinas Purbakala, 7
Srinivasan, Doris (1973), 'Sarpdhyä: Myth and Ritual,' Indo-Iranian ]ournal
15: 161 - 178
Staal, Frits (1963), 'Sanskrit and Sanskritization,' The ]ournal rif Asian Studies
22: 261 - 275; reprinted in Harrison, JA. (ed.) (1972) Sou th and Southeast
Asia: Enduring Scholarship, Tucson
Staal, Frits (1970), 'Sanskrit Insciptions from Cambodia,' New York Review rif
Books 15/1: 15. Dutch translation in Staal 1986b = 1989: 225 - 228

108

Staal, Frits (1978) 'The Ignorant Brahmin of the Agni eayana,' Annals of the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research lnstitute 50: 337- 348
Staal, Frits (1979), 'The M eaninglessness ofRitual,' Numen. InternationalJournal of the History of Religions 26: 2 - 22
Staal, Frits, in eollabora tion with Somayajipad, c.v. and Nambudiri, M .
Itti Ravi (1983), AGNI. The Vedic Ritual of t/ze Fire Allar, I-II , Berkel ey:
Asian Humanities Press
Staal, Frits (1986a), 'The Sound of Rcligion ,' N umen 33:185 - 224
Staal, Frits (1986b, 1989), Over zin en onzin in.filos~fie, wetenschap en religie, Amsterdam: M eul enhoff
Staa l, Frits (1986e), 'The Fidelity of Oral Tradition and the Origins of
Seienee,' M ededelingen der Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, AJdeLing Letterkunde, nr. 49/8: 25 I - 288
Staa l, Frits (1988), Een wijsgeer in het Oosten. Op reis door Java en Kalimantan,
Amsterdam : M eulenhoff
Staal, Frits (1989, 1993), Rules without Meaning: Ritual, Mantras and the Human
Sciences, New Vork: Peter La ng
Staal, Frits (1989), 'The Independenee oC"Rationality fom Literaey,' European
Journal oJ Sociology (3): 301 - 310
Staal, Frits (1995), 'Changing One's Mind,' Journalof lndian Philosophy 2T
53 - 55
Staa l, Frits (forthcoming ), The Language AnimaL: Wandering in Eurasia
Stein, Burton (1969), ' Integration of the agrarian system of South Indi a.' In:
R. Frykenberg (ed.), Land con trol and social structure in lndian history, M adison: University oC"Wiseonsin Press: 175- 216
Striekm a nn, Miehael (ed .) (1983a), Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of
R.A. Stein , Bruxelles: Institut Beige des Hautes Etudes Chinoises
Striekmann, Miehael (1983b), 'Homa in East Asia,' in Staal, II: 418 - 455
Stuart-Fox, David]. (1987), Pura Besakih. A Study of Balinse Religion and Society,
Ph.D. Dissertation, Australian National University
Stuart-Fox, David]. (1974), The Art ofthe Balinese Offering, Yogyakarta: Yayasan K a nisius
Stuart-Fox, David]. (1982), Once a Century: Besakilz and the Eka Dasa Rudra
Festival, Jakarta: Sinar Harapa n and Citra Indonesia
Stuart-Fox, D av id]. (1991 ), ' Pura Besakih: Temple-State Relations from
Preeoloni a l to Modern Times,' in G ee rtz (cd.): 11 - 4 1
Stutterh eim, W.F. (1929), Oudheden van Bali: Het Oude Rijk van Pedjeng, I , Singaradja: Kirtya
Stutterheim, Will em (193 1), 'The M ea ning of the Hindu-Javanese candi,'
Journal oJthe American Oriental Society 51:1 - 15
SuSe = Hooykaas 1966
Sweliengrebel, ].L. (1960, 1984), ' Introduetion,' BAI.I: 1- 76

109

Taehikawa, Musashi (1993), 'Homa in Vedie Ritual - The Strueture of the
Darsapurryamäsa,' in: Nagano and 1kari 239 - 267
Taylor, Paul Miehael (1988), 'From mantra to mataraa: Opacity and Transpareney in the Language ofTobelo Magie and Medieine (Halmahera 1sland, Indonesia ),' Soc.Sci.Med. (Great Britain) 27/5: 425 - 436
Thapar, Romila (forthcoming ), Thus It Was: Historical Consciousness in Early India
Thurston, Edgar (1909), Castes and Tribes of Southern India, 1, Madras: Government Press
Verhagen, Pieter Cornelis (1993), 'Mantras and Grammar. Observations on
the study of the linguistie aspeets of Buddhist 'esoterie formulas' in Tibet,' Aspects of Buddhist Sanskrit: Proceedings of the International Symposium on
the Language of the Sanskrit Buddhist Texts, Sarnath, Varanasi: Central 1nstitute of Higher Tibetan Studies, 320- 346
Vredenbregt,Jaeob (1981 ), Hampatong: Kebudayaan Material Suku Dayak di Kalimantan/ The Material Culture of the Dayak of Kalimantan, Jakarta: Gramedia
Wheatley, P. (1982),'1ndia beyond the Ganges. Desultory refteetions on the
origins of eivilization in Southeast Asia' (Presidential Address), Journalof
Asian Studies 42,1:13 - 28
Wheeler, Sir Mortimer (1968), The Indus Civili;:;ation, Cambridge: The University Press
Wolters, O.W. (1982), History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives,
Singapore: 1nstitute for Southeast Asian Studies.
Worsley, P.J. (1972), Babad Buleleng: A Balinese Dynastic Genealogy, The Hague:
Nijhoff
Zoete de, Beryl and Spies, Walter (1939), Dance and drama in Bali, New Vork
and London: Harper and Brothers (pages 20 - 21: 'the few mudras whieh
outside the ritual of the Çivaite priests still remain in Balinese dancing
seem to mark a punetuation of a phrase, or a posture, and to have no expressive significanee in the sense of being a sign-Ianguage' ).

IlO

Index of Names

Baal, ]. van, '26 - '27
Belo, ]. ,5
Bernet Kempers, A.]. , 2, 97
Bhattacharya, K ., 101
Bosch, F. D.K. , 10, 97
Brunncr, H. , 17,45
Burkert, W., 50
Cas paris, ]. G. de, '24, 30, 47
Caland, W., 8
Cocdès, G., I
C rucq, K. G , 24 - 25
Dichl , GG., 19
Dumont, L. , 97, 99
Dysson, F., 50
Emeneau, M., 48
Filliozat, ]. ,9 1
Fox, ].]. ,30
Fo ucault, M. , 47
Gcertz, G , 15,3 1, 47
Gcertz, G and H ., 92, 98
Gonda, ]. , 1,6, 12, 18,45 - 46, 91, 100
Gori s, R ., 45, 92 - 93

Goudriaan, T., 10
H a rdeland, A., 26, '28
H eekcren, H .R . van, '25
Hinzler, H.I.R ., 6
Hooykaas, C., passim
Ida Bagus Made Poleng, 53
Ida Pada nd a Gde Agu ng, 53 - 54
Ida Padand a Gde Manu aba, passim
I G usti Ng ura h Kctut Sangka, 53
J ossclin deJ ong, ].P.B., 26 - 27
Ju ynboll, H.H ., 25
Kern , H. , 91
Kleen, T. de, 7, 13,53
Korn, V E., 14 15,3'2,92 - 93
Krom, N.]. , 1, 42,44
Kulkc, H., I 2, 24,48, 94
L e kke rke rke~

C., 92
Lcvi, S., 17- 19,3° - 31,4°,42,45,5 1,
99
Logan, W., 48
Ma hakasyapa, 99

111

Naipaul, V.S., 40
Needham, R., 26
Nietzsche, F. , 47
Nihom, M., 44, 47

Soejono, R.P., 25
Strickmann, M., 45
Stuart-Fox, DJ., 30- 31, 35, 37- 38
Stutterheim, W.F., 25, 42 - 44
Swellengrebel, j.L., 24, 35

Pataiijali, 40
Rhys Davids, C.A.F., 44
Rubinstein, R., 98

Taylor, P.M. , 30
Thapar, R., 99
Vredenbregt, j., 46

Sankara, 41 , 100
Schärer, H. , 25 - 31
Schipper, K.M., 33
Schmidt, W., 27
Schulte Nordholt, H.G.C. , 47
Sirindhorn, Princess Maha Chakri,
18

112

Weber, M ., 2
Wheatley, P., 97
Wolters, O.W. , 97

