 For More information about Swatantryaveer Savarkar and Swatantraveer Savarakar Rashtriya Smarak visit us at www.savarkarsmarak.com 
A Hot Spicy Medley 
© Himani Savarkar, 
Savarkar Bhavan, Raja Thakur Path, Shanivar Peth, Pune. 
Tel :+912025544751 
Internet Rights are with Swatantryaveer Savarkar Rashtriya Smarak Trust, 
Dadar, Mumbai 
Translated By : Mugdha Ghate 
Project Director : Ranjit Vikram Savarkar 
Project Co-ordinator : Ashok Ramchandra Shinde 
This book is available in : Assamese, Bengali, English, Gujrathi, Hindi, Kannad, Malyalam, Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu 
A Spicy Hot Medley (1) Mohammed Ali and Hassan Nizami’s Kick boxing. The kick boxing going on between Mohammed Ali and Hassan Nizami is getting more and more interesting day by day. In the last round Mohammed Ali’s kick landed straight on Hassan Nizami’s Nose tip! As per the news doing rounds in the Delhi market, It is being said that fearing the angry Hindus who would like to teach a lesson to Hassan Nizami after the assassination of Martyr Shraddhananda, Hassan Nizami is preferring to stay within the guarded fortress of his home and work on the possible upliftment of the Muslims. But Mohammed Ali is determined to make the whole country aware of this. In an effort to do so he recently showered Hassan Nizami with a lot of titles. Amongst them were the following titles - Government Spy – A traitor who survives on the Nizams’ salary and snitches against him to the Government, A Back Stabber. A Coward hiding in his house after the assassinations of Martyr Shraddhananda! On receiving this shower of titles, just to prove that he is no more a coward than Ali, Hassan Nizami also visited the prison just as Ali had gone to visit Abdul Rashid, however his worthless body was surrounded by 10-15 of his bodyguards. ! ✵ ✵ ✵ 
Shraddhanand’s murder is not an act of one person; do not blame the Muslim community of this kind of behaviour. A lot of people did not understand Gandhiji’s divine words, and they said – ‘Gandhiji is not shrewd enough to understand the Muslim mentality.’ But not it is seen that they were wrong and what Gandhiji saw with his divine vision was the truth. This has been proved by the recent happenings in the Muslim community. For example - Following the above incidence Jafar Ali said- ‘I would have kissed Ghazi Rashid’s sword! - If there was a Muslim Rule today! In the Calcutta Municipal Corporation the proposal to condemn the assassination of Shraddhanand was unanimously opposed by all the Muslims. In the Mosques of Meerut, the Muslims lit lamps on hearing the news of the assassination. In Gorakhpur Muslims distributed sweets, while in Delhi’s Jama Masjid, Mohammed Ali had public prayers for the acquittal of Ghazi Rashid. Funds were collected from Peshawar to the smallest villages of the smallest districts in Maharashtra for Ghazi Rashid trial. No major Muslims functions were organized to condemn the assassination and Muslim traders refused to close their shops during the strikes. All major Muslim newspaper’s ridiculed the assassination of Shraddhanand . One paper wrote – ‘ Maybe the servant of Shraddhanand ( who was wounded trying to save Shraddhanand’s life ) must have committed the murder and Rashid is being unnecessarily implicated.’ Other wrote – ‘as it is Shraddhanand was unwell , and the seeing his serious condition the Hindus thought why not shoot him and make him a Martyr.’ It is a good opportunity to direct some heat at the Muslims!’ And the Hindus thought this and they themselves shot Shraddhanand and killed him! Jaffar Ali remarked, ‘Shraddhanand has already reborn as a cow and is a promise to some Muslim butcher’s stump, then tell me 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
when all the blame of the tendency to killing Shraddhanand lies on only one person why blame the large Muslim community on the whole, how truthful and justified is this statement made by Gandhiji ! His divine vision saw this truth immediately! He didn’t have to think even for a moment! He is a real Mahatma! A real Visionary!’ That is exactly why when all the rights were bestowed upon this great visionary, and the reins of this nation were handed over to this Dictatorship, within four years of Lokmanya Tilak’s death, Communalism and Politics came to such a shape in India! Where ever one saw, only prosperity, awakening and radiating brilliance! Only this Hindu Organization was being dogmatic from time to time. If this organization would not have crossed their paths, then inspired by the radiance of this “dictator’s vision” at least the Hindu community would have been left to burn on itself. ✵ ✵ ✵ 
In the past Mohammed Ali had once said, ‘If all the charges against Ibn Saud, are proved true, I myself will die fighting against him! Ali went there, the charges were proved true. The fight against Ibn Saud started, but Ali came back alive; none of Ibn Saud’s soldiers were free to waste any ammunition on Ali. Nobody was ready to do him a favour of killing him! The men of Ibn Saud are really so cruel! After Shraddhanand’s death Mohammed Ali said, ‘Now if I have to atone this sin with my life, I would gladly sacrifice my blood.’ But leave alone the wicked people like Ibn Saud, but the Hindu people known to be generous were not ready to do this favour on him in the name of Shraddhanand. Then Ali did not even get this virtue! Hence now in a gathering to protest against the deployment of forces against China, Mohammed Ali was again threatening the world with his death! If you send the army to China, I will lie on the very rails on which the train carrying these soldiers will pass and not get up until it goes over my body, he roared! The audience applauded as per the custom and we were worried that now Mohammed Ali will not live as the army would definitely go to China! When saddened by the thought of Mohammed Ali’s death we read two different pieces news, in one newspaper! The army left for China and Mohammed Ali was abusing the Hindus and Hassan Nizami in a speech at the Jama Masjid. Mohammed Ali missed the train to death the third time! But how did this happened was still a mystery! Perhaps, when the forces leaving for China sat in the train, this representative of truth, the great Mohammed Ali must have rushed to lie on the rails but instead of lying across then must have lied between them and the train would have passed over him leaving him alive. Well one has to have the information about how to die! Now this third chance was missed, now let us see when Mohammed Ali can again feel like dying the fourth time. The only fear was , while crying Wolf, Wolf, just for fun, hopefully the wolf doesn’t really come. Pandit Motilal Nehru and Dr. Kishchul and other devoted nationalist leaders decided to start practicing law again. Rightly also, as whatever upliftment of the country that they tried to do by giving up the law practice was done. Swaraj was obtained in one year and lost also! So 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
now it’s natural that each one should start earning their bread and butter. They did not give up Practicing law because it was a bad thing, but because people said it was bad and without people they did not know who to lead. But now people don’t criticize lawyers so much and both the arrows of lawyership and leadership can sit in the quiver of greatness. Hence what is the impediment in starting the law practice again? 
- Shraddhanand, Dated 3rd March, 1992. 
(2) Eight Months after the Patuakhali Satyagraha. 
Until now the Patuakhali Satyagraha was going on as per the rules. In the meantime you all had read in Shraddhanand that our Gorkha brothers had also gone there to help. Finally the Hindu brothers’ called Namahshudra means, (Naamshudra) considered the lowest rank of the untouchables in Bengal sent in their five volunteers and donated themselves to this fight of the Hindu community. Those untouchables, who fought shoulder to shoulder with the higher castes the under the flag of Shri Hari to protect the Hindu religion, their untouchability was burnt in this fight, now ‘All you Hindus are brothers!’ 
This Patuakhali Satyagraha had begun about eight month ago now, and actually a group of five-to ten volunteers take out a procession singing hymns and reaches the Mosque and a loud chanting of Harinaam ensues and resonates across the village and finally until the armed soldiers come and arrest them the chanting and music continues to the highway in front of the Mosque. Immediately the next day another group of hymn singing volunteers repeat the same thing for the same result. Hundreds of volunteers were jailed, malnourished, in order to continue this procedure. The Muslim goons rioted; heads smashed; the police watch increased; auctions were announced for their taxes, the Governor fumed; the Muslims raged; but the Hindus continue with their Harikirtan and Satyagraha as it is! 
When the Muslims had not become unnecessarily prejudiced, then the Hindu band of music rarely passed from the Mosque once a year; but when the Muslims in the Mosque became prejudiced, the Hindu Satyagraha band is resonating there for the past eight months. The Hymns are chanted aloud continuously, the processions are crossing that path singing and dancing! This is called Perseverance!!! 
It is only because this little bit perseverance that the Hindu has, he has survived through these thousand years of turmoil! And he will survive for the next thousand years ! Let our ‘Rahim chacha’ remember this well. 
Till date Rahim chacha did not utter a word, when he heard the news of the Muslim goons from Bengal forcibly raped the Hindu young girls and kidnapped them from the streets and perhaps when he saw their pledge ‘We will make Bengal into Punjab’ slowly taking shape in Bengal, he might have giggled in his mind. In this week itself there was a telegram dated 28th March from Barisal that in Kapurkathi that falls under the Baitkhal Thana jurisdiction, a 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Hindu married lady named Akalmayi has been raped and kidnapped after a raid on her father’s house by the Muslim goons on the 11 March night. The police have been informed but the girl is still not found! What Rahim chacha why are you giggling? 
But Rahim chacha, wait a while, see here we have a second telegram! Let us read that and then laugh together! A Muslim goon named Faiyaz Ali, from the town of Icchamati in the Silhat District, used to molest the Hindu women on the streets whiles the passed. Last week when he tried to enter a Hindu woman’s house, in his regular stupor, a Bengali young man named Shashimohan suddenly killed him. The ‘Anand Bazar Patrika’ writes, in his statement Shashi Mohan claimed that, ‘I killed this monster, to protect the honour and sanctity of the Hindu women’. 
Did you hear that Rahim chacha? Shashimohan has just created an echo of your giggle. Isn’t it? You can still be careful. This is the bravado of the Hindu young men, that was not moved by the volcanic eruptions of machineguns and cannons of the British and when time required they would from deter pulling out the beard of British Lions’ Governor. What is the chance of the beards of your goons in front of them, Chachaji! Till date the Hindu Shashi mohan’s ignored your giggling. Not because they were sacred of you. It has been told in the past. I am saying it again, “Listen and listen carefully, Rahim Chacha, what Shashimohan said, listen well! “ I killed this monster to protect the honour and sanctity of my Hindu sisters.”” This Shashimohan is the first echo of the giggling of your religious fanatic goons at the Hindu women! Rahim Chacha, come to your senses even now. As there are strong chances that after every giggle of yours there will be a Shashimohan echo, just as definite is a reaction to every action, the chances as similarly definite! ✵ ✵ ✵ 
The Rotting Weapons In the past few months in Bengal, a lot of Revolutionary young men were arrested and sentenced to prison for long durations for possession of many dangerous bombs and pistols. In Bengal all the revolutionaries carry arms at all times. They spend thousands of rupees and put their lives in danger to gather the arms and ammunition and then spend years guarding their weaponry with their lives and when the police come, just hand over the weapons to them. Actually the Government should be thankful to such revolutionaries, who just carry the weapons and guard them with their lives, and shower them with rewards and encourage this trade. Because the Government does not have to spend a single penny for the weapons and get readymade arms and bombs and ammunition for free. This practice is extremely beneficial for the Government as it saves them double expense, the commission of the brokers and the cost of the weapons. Not only can the Government take away these weapons gathered by the revolutionaries at any time, they do not have to pay any brokerage or labour charge for the immense efforts of these revolutionaries in gathering these 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
weapons. Hence we genuinely request the Government that they should not make the mistake of penalizing these revolutionaries, who seem to have a hobby of gathering weapons and bombs, and stop this profitable business! Of course, if these revolutionaries had the habit of making proper use of whatever weapon or bomb came to their hand then they had to be severely punished. Previously they had this habit that if they found a pistol they would not wait for a bullet and go ahead use the pistol! They would not just unnecessarily gather rusty weapons and bombs wait for the police to come, then it was justified that those revolutionaries were handed out severe punishments. But these revolutionaries who just gather the weapons and handed them over to the police without a fight should be pitied rather than hated by the Government, and this organization that provides free weapons to the Government should be encouraged. ✵ ✵ ✵ 
The Forgiving Nature of the Innocent: It is being heard that, the Professor Indra, is going to request a pardon for the Abdul Rashid, the murderer of his father, Shri Shraddhanand to the Government! Great! Now the generosity shown by Shraddhanand’s one son should be imitated by the second son by requesting the Government that not only should the Government Release Abdul Rashid as per the request of Prof. Indra, but as soon as he comes out he should be given a big Bungalow with 5-10 acres of land as a reward! Seeing that his two sons have protected the honour of the Hindu religion and carried forward the tradition of Pruthviraj, Swamiji’s soul will rest in peace and hearing that a pardon for Abdul Rashid was asked for by the Hindus, the Muslims will melt in the generosity of the Hindus and what unity they would show after two thousand centuries, on hearing of the Jagir given to Rashid they would start working on it within the next five- six centuries. Why only a Jagir, as a sweet dish, why not present Rashid with a princess from some Rajput family of the Hindi Mahasabha, as soon as he comes home, so as to prove that the Hindus are so Non-violent and Forgiving! Shahjahan also was offered a Rajput princess to prove this nature by our ancestors and finally Aurangzeb was born to her!!! 
Really we request the Hindus that hanging Abdul Rashid to death is a cruel act and any person with Hindu blood in him should not be a part of such a cruel act that would blemish his forgiving nature. Poor Abdul Rashid was so eager to go to heaven! He even climbed the first step towards the Gates of Heaven, by killing Shraddhanand. But still as per his own statement the two steps of the heads of Lalaji and Malviyaji have to be crossed. Hence, any well wishing Hindu heart would not deter from wishing that he should be readily given a chance to live that long to complete these heavenly tasks. Hence Prof. Indra should not compel himself commit this sin to push him from the first strep and drag him to the gallows of death! He should feed the very snake that stung Shraddhanand, otherwise who will sting the other Hindus? The orthodox people worshipped snakes. Then why should the Arya 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
samajis not show kindness! We Hindus should one way or the other be the beads of Pruthviraj’s necklace!!! 
Other than that, it is natural that Malviya’s sons should envy the luck and greatness of Shraddhanand’s son who wishes to say, I forgive the very felon who killed my father, hence for that purpose at least Abdul Rashid should be allowed to live a little longer. So that when he renders Malviya’s sons and the sons of some other Hindus fatherless, they also can please kindness to the Government and the whole of the Hindu nation can have a chance to proudly announce we are the Hindu greats who forgive the very monsters who killed our fathers. !!! 
-18 April 1926. ✵ ✵ ✵ 
(3) The Shahabad Muslims threaten to become Hindus. A Muslim Khwaja wrote a letter to Hassan Nizami saying that I owe a Savarkar one thousand rupees; if you give me that amount then it’s alright or I will get purified and converted to a Hindu! After this example at least, we hope that our Muslim brothers would give up being jealous of our purification and reconversion mission and bless it with their support. Because, the poor Muslims found a new occupation by our purification of the Muslims mission; they got a new way to become rich by repaying a loan from Savarkar. There was no purification mission and becoming a Hindu was impossible, hence being a Muslim was not beneficial. Once a person was converted to Islam, he had not a penny’s value. But otherwise he gets converted to a Hindu, this gave some benefit to being a Muslim because of the Purification Mission. Being a Muslim became worth something. Any Islam follower who felt the need for money and did not want to lose his house for it could just threaten to convert to Hinduism and the Khwaja Hassan Nizami’s treasury would shower thousands of rupees on him. All he had to say, “Or i will become a Hindu, and the money would start flowing!!! ✵ ✵ ✵ Mauli Jafarali says about ‘Rangila Rasool’ that, if today there was a Muslim Government then this author would have been sentenced to death by being stoned to death for writing that hundred paged book! Very true Miyaji, because of this greatness of the Muslim kingdom that the throne of this kingdom was crushed under the rigs! If it was a Muslim kingdom! – if the sun rose from the west! We say that, Maulavi Jafar Ali would be put in a rat cage for making a statement about the author of “Rangila Rasool”! Yes. The poverty of words! ✵ ✵ ✵ 
The Muslim brothers are shouting out loud for the past fifty years, asking for “A special representation”. A special representation in the cabinet is given to them and the percentage of their representatives elected is more than the Hindus, in Jobs more than hundreds of jobs are kept reserved for them. Even in the Calcutta Municipal corporation Muslims are getting 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
more representation than Hindus per hundred. However, in one thing at least the Hindus had refrained from given the Muslims a special representation, that thing is riots. Because in all the riots till the past year the number of people dying and injured are Hindus and they keep increasing. On all these places on Hindus are appointed. Not a single place is secured for the Muslims in those even in a hundred. This selfishness of Hindus was despicable and unforgiveable. It is justified that on all the places of material joy - Cabinet, Jobs, Municipal Corporations, etc the Muslims received special representation, and all the heavenly joy of the ultimate earthly pleasures like dying or getting injured in the riots that these religious heroes used to get, at the time of the riots no Muslims heroes were allowed to get a chance attain this pleasure. No doubt about it, that this selfishness of the Hindus was utterly disgraceful. Right up to the last year all the dead and injured were only Hindus! These selfish Hindus did not let even one Muslim to have a chance be beaten so badly that he would die in the name of Allah and become a Martyr, in all other things these Muslim brothers got special representation and when it came to the placements for seats of more than hundred of dead and wounded in a riot, these Hindus did let any Muslim gain that seat. Such an act is so unacceptable and against the basic generous attitude of the Hindus. Due to this discriminatory attitude of the Hindus, that they would not only not let the Muslims get more seats through special representation in the riots, they were even not ready to share equal seats with them, that the Muslims refrained from uniting with the Hindus. Why should they bear this discrimination and for how long? It was clear that, this discrimination by the Hindus of not letting the Muslims take any fruits of the riots was a biggest obstacle in the Hindu- Muslim unity, had more truth to it than any other statement. But the fortunate thing is, that since the Bengal riots the Hindus have started giving up their selfishness slowly, and this year they have made sure they themselves serve the fruits of the riots, with their own hands. For example let see the Bareilly Riots, in all the important riots that happened in the past month and a half, one was the Bareilly riot. During this riot, the Hindus handed over all the rights and titles of “demi-religious heroes’, to the Muslims by their own hands, without taking it for themselves at approximately fifty percent. If there were 54 Hindus injured 43 Muslims were also injured. Though the Hindus were still a little selfish in being injured, but in death they fulfilled this discrepancy to the fullest. Because if six Hindus reached heaven by dying in the riots, they ensured that seven Muslims reached heaven by dying in the riots! The religions servants ensured that against the contract of 50% seats, 1excess seat was given to the Muslims. In Bareilly, 6 Hindus and 7 Muslims died, The Kanpur Hindus though did not show the same generosity, they were not entirely selfish. Because Hindus took 105 people as injured they did so after ensuring 81 Muslims were injured first, thereby abiding by the National Congress 30% special representation granted to the Muslims. In case of reaching the heavenly pleasure by death in a riot the Hindus ensured that every Hindu who climbed the steps to 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
heaven by dying in the riot was followed by a Muslim dying in the riot and gave a full 50% representation to the Muslims as contracted by Das. But in Nagpur, the Hindus did not leave a stone unturned in their show of generosity. They were given a lot of Special representation in all the places like Cabinets, municipal corporation, jobs etc, like they had not asked for anywhere else. They were given much more than equal percentage of seats in the dead and injured in riots, and made semi heroes or full religious heroes. As when 47 Hindus were injured 77 Muslims were injured and where 10 Hindus were sent to heaven, 14 Muslims were sent to heaven. 
- 6th October, 1927 
✵ ✵ ✵ 
(4) The Muslim plot for Hindus to play music in front of their Mosques 
We are extremely saddened to inform that it is our destiny to give you a bad news that as soon as the Muslims bitten by the Music disease will hear they will be pained! For those Maulavis and Maulanas whose livelihood depends on creating a rift and instigating riots between the Hindus and Muslims, this news though true would be hard to believe. In a village of Mau near Jhansi, a big gathering of the Hindus and Muslims took place, and they have found an amicable solution to the above stated problem and how? The Muslims have agreed that, whenever the Hindus take out a procession playing their instruments in front of the Mosques the Muslims will have no objections to it!! As soon as this treaty was accepted the very next day another gathering was held and this oral contract was put on paper and duly signed by both the parties. The contract is as follows: ‘In the Mau village in the Jhansi district the Hindus and Muslims may take out procession at any time from the temples and mosques and there will be no objections to the playing of music and bands from either parties. As it has been a tradition of the Mau region that such processions and music has been played and taken across the mosques and the temples in the past. Hence we Hindu- Muslims will not fight each other over this petty issue of music and will continue to follow the tradition that has been followed in the past. This treat is acceptable to us and we have signed it voluntarily and without any ill intentions in our minds.’ 
There is no doubt that, the question of Music that seemed so difficult, for all the educated, gentlemen Muslims and great religious leaders from Maulana Mohammed Ali to the village goons of Patuakhali and for which hundreds of Hindu and Muslim heads were cracked was solved by these uneducated Muslims in such a simple village manner was a blemish on all that stood for Islamism! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
The other main fault in this contract would be, the disrespect shown towards the hearing ability of the Gods. The main theory of the all the wise Maulavis and Maulanas was that, if music is played in front of the mosques our prayers are interrupted, that means they are not audible to the God as they should be! This theory was falsified by this contract, because it clearly stated that, even if music is played the prayers of the devotees are not interrupted and they can be heard by God! What a blatant lie! Can God read your mind that he will be able to hear our prayers in the chaos of musical instruments! What is a devotee who cannot be disturbed by the clanging of the loud music and can continue his prayers? A true is the one who has more focus on when the Hindus music starts, and when i go out to crack their heads in the name of God and carry out a riot and a robbing spree than on the words of the prayers! A true Devotee! All the rest are blasphemists! These Muslims from Mau had rejected the very basic theory of the Maulavis and told the Hindus, ‘play your music as Allah can hear even the trinkets in the feet of the dove!’ The Allah who can hear the trinkets in an ant’s feet, and can read the mind of an ant why can’t he hear our prayers with all the musical instruments playing , his hearing ability and the ability to read people’s minds is definitely not so outdated! And the most important fault in this contract that not even four drops of blood were shed on it. Only a black ink contract! Oh Hindus, this is an extremely unforgiveable breach of protocol, you play music in front of the Mosques, and Muslims you play music in front of the Temples!! – This one small statement, by a few uneducated Muslims, bravely solved a question that even after hundreds of murders and rivers of blood, hundreds of educated Men could not solve! They did not even break ten to twelve heads! This is such meanness. Such contract has to be written in blood as has been clearly a standing order of the day and just a black ink contract had solved this question! 
Oh! Oh! Now on what grounds do we collect donations from these uneducated Muslims! Even after the Khilafat movement we had the issue of Music. That also would die with one statement, then with what face will be ask for donations! And if there is no money, no funds, then what is the use of becoming a Khilafata Maulavi! Even then Maulavi’s don’t lose heart, even though Khilafat has gone and the music is an issue of the past, you still have hooliganism that is a trait of the Muslims community. It on the shoulder of these hooligans that you can base your Maulavi status. Look at Bengal. A completely opposite telegraph has arrived from there! Mau is Mau, - In Bengal Muslims are still very strong. Listen to their great act of Bravery! 
The Impact of the Ghostly trait Listen and Listen carefully – An act of sinful bravado that not only is shameful for the Muslim Hooliganism but also to the ghostly Hooliganism:- The pen is also ashamed and horrified to tell this tale, but I am doing it just out of the sense of duty: A Pundit named Rajavanshi lived in the village called Bhavanipur in the Rajashahi District. They do not have the parda system and some women from their family were returning home from the market when the 
www.savarkarsmarak.com night fell. Suddenly a few Muslim hoodlums stopped them and kidnapped a young woman amongst them. She was pregnant. These religious hoodlums started raping this women one after the other. While this devilish act was going on that woman fell unconscious – and started bleeding- even then those Muslim hoodlums would not stop. Just then the pundit arrived there with the police, they found that these hoodlums had run away, that women was lying in the pool of blood – and what a grotesque sight! Her foetus was lying on the ground all mashed up and dead! They have arrested one of those hoodlums and the case is in trial! The Newspaper ‘Swatantra’ that published this news also published another news that , ‘Foward’ says, in the case of a woman called Priyasundari the accused have been convicted and sentenced to 7 years rigorous imprisonment! It is clearly understood that these accused were Muslim religious hoodlums. On the night of 24th September Kurbaan and Latif, two Muslim Hoodlums entered the house of Priyasundari and took her to one of the rice fields and there with the help of their other religious brothers attacked her honour. Ramakant Havaldar saw her when she was almost dead and lying in the pool of blood. As the police came to know of this incidence they arrested both these monsters. But that pure pious woman died in the hospital after 28 days. The doctor certified that this pious lady died of being severely raped. Her young son testified that these hoodlums pointed a knife to him and kidnapped their mother! In order to disguise their identity Kurbaan and Latif had shaved off their beards and moustaches. The judge sentenced them to seven years imprisonment. What more can you write – about a culture where hundreds of people are born, or can survive or are considered co-habitants – and with actual evidence proves that the backs are patted of those who steal orphaned newborn infants of the Hindus. Shame on such a culture Shame! Shame! Shame! On such a culture! The only way to improve this culture is to finish it off from its roots! If criminal law is not sufficient to do that alone then apply the actual animal law and eradicate this culture! One is scared with the doubts if there is an Epidemic of the ghostly plaque in the Muslim community, with the way hundreds of such monstrous and cruel men and women are born in this community. For example look at this news from the free press: On the 24th September in a place called Kumarbil in Badalpatia Thana, a Muslim women cooked meat for her husband, but before the husband returned home a dog ate the meat, so in order to shoot two birds in an arrow, she deciding that her stepson should also die, killed the small boy and cooked his meat and served her husband. She made the father eat the meat of his own son without informing him what meat it was! This is how she revenged her stepson! This woman is currently under arrest. Where such monstrous women exist, they will reproduce only the men with the abovementioned cruel and monstrous traits! Once this monstrous trait is claimed as Religious duty then, a person loses even the very humanity o calling his father a father and his son a son. When the dog goes mad he first tries to bite another and then while biting the other starts biting itself. Similarly these monsters while shedding others blood, soon start shedding the blood of their own family. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
This is the experience of History. From the borders they tortured and evacuated the Hindus because they were in minority, but when the Hindus were gone, the turned to their own community, saying Hindus are infidels, but even in Muslims not all are true Muslims. Look at these Shias, according to the Sunni Sect, they are as infidel as the Hindus and in as much minority as the Hindus too. Alright then, if we want to make our region a truly Muslim region then let’s treats the Shias’ just like the Hindus. Thinking this, The Sunni knives that were hungry for blood started attacking the Shias calling them ‘Semi Infidels’ and started a communal war against them. The Sunni Muslims evacuated the Shias as they too were minority! The reasons the Shia Muslims had for laughingly torturing the Hindus were the same reasons the Sunnis had for torturing the Shias. When the Shias were torturing and evacuating the Hindus not a single voice was raised but the moment they had to face the same Music from the Sunnis, There were huge gatherings and everyone was screaming, ‘Torture! Injustice! Government save Us! These Sunnis are eradicating us! These Sunnis are monsters!’ Even Khan Bahadur Sir Sayyad Ismail condemned the religious cruelty of the Sunnis! But when the same knives of religious cruelty were stabbing the Hindus, the Shias believed it to be the sword of the Messenger of God! Fellows, you get what you give, you reap what you sow. The moment you see religious difference you scream ‘kill them”, as long as you continue to have this terrible monstrous opinion in your heart, till then you will not only be the enemies of Hindus, you will be your own enemies. Just because Hindus worship idols kill them, and because Shias don’t believe in the Khalifa under the Ali, Ali is equally sacred for them as Paigambar so they are also killed claiming that they are infidels. Where the Shias are strong, there the Sunni’s the killers of the descendents of Ali will be killed. After the Shias are killed then it will be the Sunnis. Within the Sunnis also there will be killings, have been happening- are happening. Because within them also there are several sects and opinions – and if the opinions are different then, “Kill the Scoundrel” is the religious order! – At least that is what thousands of Muslims believe. As within the Muslims both the sects Shias and Sunnis look upon the Khojas’ with such extreme enmity, that the Khojas are probably prohibited from offering Namaz in the Muslim Masjids. The Muslims and the Khojas have a difference of religious belief. The Muslims have extreme disgust with the philosophy that, “There is a part of God, in every human being”, while the Khojas believe that all the descendants of Aga khan have a part of God in them and as God’s ashes, it is the religious duty of every descendent of Khoja to pray and revere it! Recently there is a revolution arising in the Khoja community and its sponsors have written an open letter to Aga Khan. Its copies have been distributed everywhere. In this letter it is clearly stated that, Aga khan himself has said, that the many parts of the Korans’ relevance are projected. Mohammed was the last Muslim calling Paigambar. Khoja’s say that, the actual ancestor of the Khoja’s is also Paigamber and Aga Khan himself claims that he would need six months to decipher the cryptic real Koran. As these statements of Aga Khan have been published by his followers and it gave rise to the dispute about whom the actual the Koran belonged to; it is not 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
necessary to say that since the death of Mohammed that created sects and sub-sects within the Muslims and hence the Muslims hated the Khojas so intensely. In the said letter there is a lot of criticism about the lakhs of rupees gathered in the name of Aga khan by threatening the poor innocent people of boycott and spent in the foreign country on the luxuries for him. The religious seers who have been tarnished by the criticism of his own followers try to convert the innocent Hindus by being unblemished incarnations of God. 
- Date. 3rd. November, 1927. 
(5) Threatening Letters 
The Judge Ogilvie who believed the pious try of killing Mr. Rajpal, Swami Satyanand, Lala Nanakchand and sentenced some Muslims to death, also attracted the wrath of the Muslim Religious devotees. One of these pious Seers, has done a favour and sent a letter to Mr Ogilvie to inform him that he is being considered the enemy of Islam. There is no doubt that with this threatening letter Mr. Ogilvie will leave India, on the first ship out! 
But why do these Islamic religious heroes stop just with a favour on Mr. Ogilvie? The judge who sentenced Abdul Rashid to death and the Privy Council group, who declined his appeal, are still alive! They should also be sent the death warrants immediately, and then they will also get scared and leave all their work, and then some other Abdul Rashid after killing some other Shraddhanand will not be terrified and wouldn’t need to fake insanity or suffer from fever due to fear and cry trembling! 
The two gentlemen Muslims, who demolished the Hindu idols, should have been given awards for doing so because it has been the motto of the Muslims to demolish the idols as claimed by the Maulavis and Mullahs. But there also a wicked Magistrate sentenced those two gentlemen men to two months rigorous imprisonment! - This wicked Magistrate should also be sent a threat letter like Mr Ogilvie, so that he will also run away. 
Two Islamic Religious heroes, Akbar and his friend, had abducted a 12 year old Hindu boy Narendranath, a student of the M.E School in Mashipur village. They tried to convert him into a Muslim by raping him and a case has been filed against them in the court of law. An immediate warrant of death should be sent to the Magistrate in whose court the case is being heard, so that he would also run away or at least free the two great Islamic heroes who were trying to molest the gentlemen and infidel young man out of fear. In that letter please mention very clearly that, release the men who were performing the Islamic duty of molesting the boy and not only that also sentence that 12- year old boy who in spite of so much torture did not accept Islam, be spanked with a cane for his being adamant! – or else , you know the consequences! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
The same incidence occurred with the Islamic gentlemen Juberkhan, Yusufseth, etc. in Khulna. They tried to abduct a Hindu girl named Suvarnamayi. Thousands of Muslims abduct such Hindu girls. It has been their traditional custom. It is the duty of Juber Khan etc, to follow this tradition. But in the Khulna sessions court , a case is going on against them under sections 36 and 144 etc. This is an attempt to stop the religious custom of Islamic followers. The Sessions court should also be sent a letter instantly so that he will also come to his senses with fear and hand over Suvarnamayi to the Muslims and uplift her. 
The Ghazi who killed Lala Nanakchand was not only hanged to death, but at the spot where he killed Lala, the Government has deployed more police at that Mochi gate (Lahore) and ordered that expense to be recovered from the Muslims! What a torture of the Muslims! For petty crimes like murder that are so easily executed, and as soon as that happens the poor religious fanatics killers are given death sentences one after the other. The necks of the Ghazis are not saved from the gallows even if they are crying! - That’s that, but what is the fault of the place where the murders were committed? But those places have taxes for extra police! The poor Muslims are lamenting, “Oh Great”! – This Commissioner of Lahore should also be sent a threat letter. Then that coward will also get scared and remove those extra police and also give back the lives of those Muslims that were hanged! 
A Ghazi from Nagpur was also being tortured similarly. This Ghazi’s name is Abdul Kadar. This Ghazi’s name is included in those great Muslim seers who have taken up the great task of molesting the Hindu girls and converting them to Muslim. He tricked a Hindu woman named Saku, saying that he would escort her to her sister’s house for which he knew the address. He took her to his house cunningly and told her that his wife was calling her and as soon as she went in he locked her in a room and silenced her at gun point. In the night he raped her and the next day he put her in a horse carriage and took her to another place at his daughter’s house. Both his daughters also helped him in this pious job! His wife and sister helped him in raping her and they threatened to convert to Islam. Finally, at a Muslim inspector’s house her thumb impression was taken on a blank paper – naturally, the paper stated that, she was voluntarily accepting Islam! Coincidentally, her prayers were heard by God, and the Police understood the case and now the Ghazi is arrested and he is under trial in Nagpur! As a matter of fact, abducting a Hindu woman, raping and torturing her and through these most revered, pious religious Islamic acts explaining to her the importance and greatness of Islam and forcibly converting her into a Muslim, is considered the most honourable act in the Muslim Community. This is clear from the help Abdulla received from the Muslim Inspector’s wife, his wife, sister, the Muslim inspector and neighbours. But, what a blasphemous act that the City Magistrate of Nagpur should file cases in the court of law against these people! This Magistrate should be sent the threat letter as per the custom for this! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
How the Muslim women also believe that raping the Hindu women and orphan boys and forcibly converting them to Islam, to be pious can be seen through an Incidence that occurred in Katni in November. A 13- year old girl was pounced upon by a devoted Muslim seer named Khistu, immediately the girl screamed. Instantly the man’s wife pulled the girl by the hand and stuffed her mouth with a rag and pulled out a knife. Then this great saint and his pious wife abducted the girl and took her to faraway place of their uncle and hid her. As soon as the Muslim person abducts a Hindu girl the whole community gets buy covering up his tracks as an act of duty; this feeling is so deep rooted amongst the Muslim community. This can be seen in the way, Khistu’s aunt gave this girl to his mother to hide as soon as the police started the hunt. Khistu’s mother was arrested while was taking the girl! Now the Ghazi Khistu and his Ghazni wife are in jail! If a Hindu boy would have kidnapped a Muslim girl, his mother instead of being proud of her son, would have scared him with a hot spatula; and his unrelated village will cry out so loud that their voices would reach Kashi and Rameshwar, and would have boycotted the boy as if he himself had converted to a Muslim. But look at Khistu’s mother, what a pious and religious woman! Let that be, - but all those people who arrested and jailed the Ghazi and Ghazni Couple should be sent a death warrant each and caught. Their address is ‘Katni, Police station’. 
Another address, where a death warrant must be sent is: ‘Ram-Swarup Motor driver, Bazaar Area Kanpur’. – Because when a Muslim woman was abandoned by her husband, after many days purified her decided to marry her like a Hindu woman, causing a lot of unbearable distress to the hearts of the Muslim religious leaders. It is a pious religious duty of the Muslims, to abduct or forcibly take Hindu women from their houses and rape them, and convert them to Muslims- in fact it is their religion itself of the Ghazi goons and their communal group. But how the Hindus should dare to purify the Muslim women even, though abandoned by their husbands, and marry them? Bloody Infidels! Naturally, hundreds of Ghazi goons attacked Ram Swarup’s house and just when they were trying to abduct the woman, the police arrived! On reaching the police station, the woman gave a statement saying that she is purified and converted to a Hindu and it would be sinful for her to even think of another man other than Ram Swarup! After this statement, as per the cruel British law restrictions the woman was handed over to Ram Swarup. Hence, a letter should be sent to Ram Swarup’s address and the Indian Penal Code having these cruel restrictions should be burnt! 
In a village of Bengal called Feni, Shamnaad the wife of Harchandradas, was raped and abducted by a Ghazi named Lalmiyan. He was sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment. Even that may be excused; but at Alipore in a case in front of the Sub- Divisional Magistrate, what a woman Shashibala put six-seven Ghazis’ under one instruction through, should be revenged by the Ghazi goons and the group immediately. Shashibala’s husband was very ill. She was seventeen years old; scared she went door to door in the 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
neighbourhood asking for medicines and help. It was natural, that there was sympathy for her. Now taking pity on her one such religious Muslim took her to another for medicines. Just like him another Muslim took pity on her. Slowly such six–seven Ghazis who have pity and kindness as their motto gathered together. They took Shashibala to a lonely place and each one started to show their Muslim kindness on her! In the morning she was found lying in the street in extreme pain and almost half-dead. The Police saw her and without being kind to her, took her to the Magistrate and after her statement, simply started arresting these six- seven Ghazis! In the court when the 17-year old, a tearful Shashibala was telling her painful tale, a lot of the heartless monsters in the audience instead of laughing aloud like the Muslim Ghazis were in tears! Of course, those tear shedding audiences siding Shashibala, and all those trying to arrest the Ghazis, Police, Magistrate should be immediately sent threat letters and be informed that if they do not stop the investigation of Shashibala and if they continue the cruelty towards these six-seven Muslim religious followers, who were only trying to be kind to Shashibala – then within six weeks The Ghazi goons and their group would stab each one of you, with their sacred knife and perform an act of religious bravado! Then the whole of Calcutta Police will be terrified, and even the notorious Officer will run away abroad!! Of course, it is true to send hundreds of letters to all the addresses we have given will cost a lot. Reading those in the past two months, the ten-twelve Muslims were sentenced to life, kalapani, for rioting at various places, the twenty – twenty-five men who were sentenced to five and seven years rigorous imprisonment for a petty thing like abducting children, and many were sentenced to inhuman punishments like jail time and isolation in dark chambers, prison, etc. – We have to avenge them! Hence, we may even have spend hundreds of rupees to send those many threat letters to those many places – But there is another option – Why are these Muslim gentlemen tortured? Of course because the British regulations to not comply with the Muslim regulations of the Ghazi goons and their group. The pious task of converting the infidels into Muslims is considered a sin as per the British regulations! Hence instead of sending threatening letters to Mr. Ogilvie and the groups of Privy Council members or their soldiers, police, and the recent Magistrates, it would be best to send a threat letter to the Head of the British Rule King George, should do the job! On behalf of the Ghazi Goons and group, some responsible citizen like vegetable seller Maulana from Delhi, Mumbai or Calcutta should send the letter of threat on the London address of King George fearlessly, saying that as soon as you see this letter you should flee from India within a week and hand over your crown to the Amir of Afghanistan! With one such letter the torture of all the Muslim gentlemen will be over! With a one – two pence stamp’s job! Once the letter reaches, then how dare King George, will deny it! As soon as the letter from the Ghazi goons and group reaches him, there is no doubt; he will send the crown in a parcel!!! 
- Date 9th December, 1927 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
(6) The Four Certificates received It is understood that when an impartial third person, gives a certificate to a third person, it is very prestigious. But if a boy says to a Pundit, ‘Bravo Panditji?’, or if a circumcised boy showers a boy who is going through a thread ceremony with good wishes, some Curzon praises Surendranath or a dog pats on the back of his opponent after a big fight over a piece of bread saying ‘you fought well’, or if Gen. Dyer shed a tear for a boy killed at Jallianwala Bagh, then there is no doubt that, these certificates become extraordinary. We have found a few extraordinary certificates, some are given below. 
The certificate of the Muslims for the Hindus There are no surprises that Malviyas and Brahmins praise the Hindu organisations. Their eyes may be clouded with prejudice; but Maulana Hajrat Mohani also himself says that, ‘The organisation’s movement is moving along the organisation’s policy in one string. In all the places Kanpur, Nagpur, Bareilly, etc., Hindus only started the riots. In all these places the Hindus killed the Muslims, beat them. The Hindus are far ahead of the Muslims, they are politicians and very clever. There plot is hence very strong. First they kill the Muslims; and when the Muslims start killing, they shout out loud and raise a fuss over it, and create pretence of Muslims unity. Then they attack the Muslims from behind the shield of understanding. When the government files cases against the Hindus, the Hindu lawyers fight those cases for free, and the Muslim lose their houses and cattle under the burden of the expenses. The main thorn that keeps piercing our heart is that The Hindus, who used to hide in their houses, are today becoming strong and coming out to fight! They themselves come and attack us, just to test our strength. This is the game plan of the organisation. 
The certificate of the Muslims for the Muslims When the opposition praises the opposition it is incredible, similarly when a friend criticises a friend and a teacher criticises his students it is worth consideration and no doubt incredible. If the Hindus say something about the Muslims, it may not be true. But it would normally not be considered as biased, if Muslims say something about Muslims. Therefore, in the 14th September edition of his newspaper “Munadi”, Hassan Nizami himself certified the Muslims, the excerpts of which are given below. Hassan Nizami says, “Today we Muslims are jealous of the Arya Samajis and want to make the whole world Muslim. But the fact is (1) We Muslims are Muslims only for namesake. (2) Allah said that do not lie; but today Muslims are the biggest liars compared to others. (3) It is a religious edict, do not consume alcohol; but today Muslims openly drink alcohol and stumble about. (4) Another Religious edict is do not steal, but go and see in the prisons, the most notorious of robbers all are mostly Muslims. (5) The religious edicts say prostitution is sin, but if you go to the brothels most shops are of Muslim women! The people going to them are also mostly Muslims. (6) If today the most 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
lazy, the most liars, and village goons if there are any are Muslims. (7) Where the fame of our ancestors was! Today it is a proverb among the people, any human so cruel, - or so wicked or such scoundrels, like Muslims! We have just become an analogy of bad vices! (This is Hassan Nizami saying all that, not us, we never praise the Muslims so loosely!) 
A certificate for Hassan Nizami from ‘Dure’ Umar Above Hassan Nizami has certified the Muslims. Now the see the certificate received by Hassan Nizami through the Muslims’ newspaper named ‘Durre’ Umar: ‘Durre Umar’ published an article with the Headline ‘First Rate Scurrilous’ and says that Hassan Nizami is a first rate scurrilous. He orders his students to pay him in obeisance. While paying obeisance the students have to say that, ‘Oh Hassan Nizami, Greatest on the earth and heaven you are the leader. There is no one more deserving of an obeisance than you! Mohammed Ali honours Hassan Ali by calling him, “An openly corrupt man! Government’s Spy.” 
The certificate by the Fanatic Hindus to the Untouchables The untouchables from the Ankleshwar village in Marathwada in Bhadoch district were having a lot of trouble with water. But they were not allowed to go the public well, then distressed and excited by manipulations of the Muslims, 30 out of them converted to Islam. Immediately the next day the fanatic Hindus, saying that they are purified by the circumcision ceremony of the Muslims, accepted them in their higher class and certified them as touchable! And not only that according to the principle “Preach what you practice” they allowed the untouchables converted to Muslims, to fill water from the public water hole from that day forward. Those untouchables, who in spite of the trouble with water did not accept Islam, were still untouchables. It is clear that they cannot even touch the water. We request and recommend all our readers to “bow in obeisance” to all those who certified the untouchables who converted Muslims as touchable and filled water on the public well with them following the principle preach what you practice! 
“Shraddhanand” is getting tired of reporting news of purifications! In February, one thousand non-Hindu families means three - four thousand people were purified by the Hindu mission. The ceremony went on for twelve hours! Swami Shraddhanand purified nearly 60,000 Malkana Rajput Muslims. Then he was shot by a Muslim murderer with a pistol! 
But after Shraddhanand, in the past year, the above mentioned Calcutta’s Hindu Mission operators, especially purified the Gaddi Muslims of Bihar and in Bengal performed over 50,000 purifications. Since the operators of this Hindu Mission have crossed 60,000 these operators were also becoming eligible to be murdered by t he Muslims oppressors. To justify that in the last month a Muslim stabbed and injured Swami Parmanandji (not Prof. Bhai Parmanand). This Muslim was hiding in the purified Gaddi Muslims dressed like Brahmins. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
After is stabbed once or twice he was caught. But Parmanandji was not left dead but just injured. 
That was bad; It was very bad that Parmanandji was just injured and not dead like Shraddhanandji. Because unlike after Shraddhanandji died, purification was saved and after him and because he was not saved Hindu Mission continued to purify 60,000 Muslims and Christians, similarly if Pramanandji would not have been saved the mission would have got someone else to perform purification of another 60,000 Mullahs and Missionaries. But because Parmanand was saved the purification mission missed an opportunity of booming. Parmanand Swami is hurt on his left hand. Not to worry, he still has his right hand. By the time the Muslims try to harm that, Parmanandji will purify another ten – twenty thousand Gaddi Muslims with his right hand. 
For the purification of twenty thousand Muslims injury to one hand, not an expensive deal. At such a rate, any true Hindu would happily sell one hand each. Yes, if you can show a good hand, then it’s a different story. But rather than having it just hanging from the shoulder the above deal is a better option. 
Lala Lajpatraiji proudly boasted in the legislative assembly that he alone had put in so much money and effort in the upliftment of the so called ‘Dalit and Untouchable’ communities that the British Government would not have spent in a hundred years! Similarly Birla Seth also individually spends Rs. 20,000 per month for the upliftment of the Untouchables. But the government has not even spent 20,000 pence per month for this. 
- We say may be they didn’t. The British Government did not spend a single penny for the upliftment of the Untouchables. But because of that who and how can you blame the Government? British Government is a tax collecting Government. The British Government is anything but Ahilyabai to give away money like that! Is the British Government deficient in collecting taxes from the touchables and untouchables alike? No, then that’s it! It is not the job of the Government to spend the amount of taxes on untouchables or anybody, Their job is to collect; not spurge! 
Bardoli it seems is planning an agitation to not pay taxes again! Hopefully no one fills Chauri Chaura’s ears with this news! Otherwise then they will open up another escape route! The Bardoli Agitation has an ancient history to escape using the Chauri chaura escape routes. 
- 22nd March, 1928 (7) De- throne the King of Bharatpur, reason he demolished a Mosque. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
A situation had arisen that the King of Bharatpur would have had to abdicate his throne. But before that happened Hassan Nizami found some rare letters of his own God Allah, on the basis of which he published in his newspaper that, the King of Bharatpur would not have had to face this difficult situation. But he had demolished a mosque that was built (despite his refusal to it), in his province and invited the wrath of Allah in the way of this calamity! What Nizami says is true. Allah really is such a powerful God! But Lord Shoji is also not in the state of slumber anymore. It seems he has also awakened a bit. Because as soon as Allah left to Bharatpur to avenge the fallen Masjid, Shoji left for Hyderabad to avenge the Nizam’s demolition of the temples at Gulburga. He took the Nizam by his beard and shook him down the throne and infected Hyderabad with plague! If Allah Is God, Shoji is God of Gods! 
✵ ✵ ✵ 
After Hassan Nizami found letter of his own God, the innocent Hindus who read the ‘Na Vishnu: Pruthvipati:’, who looked upon King Edward of England as a Demi god made some of his letters available to Sir Sidney Lee. Reading those would even the non-believers would start believing the religious dictat of ‘Na Vishnu: Pruthvipati:’! 
Out of those letters one news paper ‘Karmaveer’ published that, when Lord Marley arranged to appoint Mr. Singh in the Viceroy’s executive committee, then King Edward wrote one of his internal letters . Therein Edward in 1901 states:- ‘You claim that Queen Victoria has promised the Hindi people; but about this I feel that, Victoria the Queen of such a kingdom would not have signed an order to appoint a native (black person) in the inner circle! I myself am doing so on this dangerous document out of duress and without a choice left! 
King Edward with extreme sadness elaborates about why this Indian, famous for being a elephant worshipper, this native, should not be appointed in the internal committee, in another one of his letters: - 
‘I feel it is extremely dangerous to any black man (Native) in the internal committee of the Kingdom!’ In the executive committee many such things are discussed, that when done in the presence of these native can be dangerous and improper.’ Poor Simon, what else was he saying! 
King Edward further writes: The black man may be very clever and your executive committee may even vouch for his loyalty but there is no guarantee as to when he will betray us? How can you guarantee that he would not make your secrets public! Even though I am signing this against my will I will like my opinion about this to be recorded. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com King Edward has also written that, Queen Victoria would have been against it, not only that even his son, (today’s King George) agrees with him! Like seed like fruit! Good or bad! 
The ever so kind King Edward was not even ready to trust one of the black men, no matter how clever he was, how loyal he was, to appoint him in the viceroy’s executive committee. Not only that, bit in another one of his letters he writes: ‘I was amazed to read that, the correspondence we conduct with Indian ministers is shared with the black people. Not only that, but the copies of your secret documents made by the native people. This system is very scary! I feel this is very objectionable! To appoint a native as an officer in the executive committee is wrong, and all the more even the very clerk positions that make the copies of the documents should not be touched by the black men’s feet! 
Even then King Edward did appoint one black native in the Viceroy’s committee! What a subject loving King! 
It is a sad thing that, this subject loving King’s wish could not be fulfilled that, that, ‘If you gave to the natives this small opening to enter, and there has to be a man with a strong heart to stop it before it would become a huge hole.’ 
This strong hearted man that King Edward wanted, is it Simon himself? ✵ ✵ ✵ 
In such a divine kingdom under normal circumstances also divine distortions will happen. See this. In Bihar a goat gave birth to a human like animal! It is a right also. If humans today in India give birth to goat like animals then what’s a wonder, that a goat give birth to human like animals! 
If a goat would have given birth to a human in Russia, it would have been a wonder! Because there men and women don’t give birth to goats, this can be supported by the man and woman painting drawn by Welford Welak. He says, 
‘When I entered Russia, then I was told that, Britain has broken all ties with Russia then all over Russia the war fear was at its peak. Each one was coming forward to prove that there were chances of foreign invasion of the motherland and boys and not only boys, but girls were also training in army combat. In public schools, young children after attaining a certain age started insisting on forming armies. Other than the days of World War, the war fear seen in Russia is as never seen before. Especially, the incidence of September 4 left a lasting impression on my mind. It was a day of the Youth Organisations Agitation. Almost five lakhs 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
of young student armies platoons walked to the Red square in Moscow. Through hundreds of ways these youth organisations showed their determination of armed protection of their country. On that day their determination and excitement was incredible. I felt pity for any country that would have tried to attack Russia, such was the demonstration of the student armies that day, because no wealthy country would have the guts to send their armies to attack the youth army in Russia! The centre of all this anger of the Russian youth was England. Austin Chamberlain’s effigy’s were being tarnished everywhere. The youth shot the effigy accurately was given the first prize!’ 
In a country of such lion hearted population how could a goat dare to give birth to a human! 
Seeing this lion clawed angry youth army’s armed demonstration, Welford Welak knew that there would be more such blood baths worldwide, which gave him Goosebumps all over the body. Then they say, ‘why did he go to this blood thirsty Russian city to get these Goosebumps, if he would have visited India seeing the smile faced Indian youth meetings he would have been tickled all over the body!’ When Simon commission came to India, our youth organisations just waved flags at them sitting in the boats and said, ‘Go, Simon Go Back! We do not need you!’ Not only that, when a hot blooded sergeant started to shower them with blows of his baton, they did not let their resolve waiver and filed a plea for justice in the court of law! These students at least showed some anger, but many thousand students honoured their country by drinking tea, eating snacks and smoking cigars, and applying the undiluted goodness on their face. Only there were some angry instances of stone-throwing, and lathi charge in Madras. As it is the Madrasis eat a lot of chillies! 
Other than these few scattered incidences, all else was just a demonstration of our eternal goodness! No wonder that goats in this country give birth to humans! 
- March 1928 
(8) A ‘Times’ Discovery: A national agitation in the name of Purification in Goa 
Mumbai ‘Times’ has made an amazing discovery that, the purification in Goa is a mask to cover up a huge nation-wide agitation. They say, ‘The radicals of British India are collaborating with the radicals of Portuguese India to join Goa with Maharashtra and make them into one free and strong state Maharashtra! God willing this may be true!! 
Like Mumbai “Times” the discovered this accurate news in Maharashtra, similarly in Calcutta a white Astrologer from Poland made another out of the word discovery. This astrologer said, “I have spent twelve years in India studying astrology and my predictions are 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
accurate. On the March 22 a big earthquake will occur and the whole of India will get buried in it! If this huge earthquake will gobble up India along with the Simon Commission or alone, he did not clarify this!’ 
This news created havoc in the Marwadi market community. A lot of people were extremely worried. But in the English states, where people were tortured under their rule started living happily. Because they were going to be free of this ruthless rule along with the torturing non-violence that had bound them to misery and this was an excellent way! Since we were one of the untorturing, non-violent animals in this agitation we kept waiting for March 22nd thinking it was the golden day. In such an earthquake – in which the whole of India was going to be swallowed – we even forgot that if we did not cap our ink bottle it would spill! Our neighbour, the Pan shop owner however, pledged a handful of rice to the astrologer if there was no earthquake! 
The sun rose on March 23rd! Neither was India swallowed in an earthquake nor the British rule! What more even the un-capped ink bottle did not topple! 
That pan shop owner said “a huge calamity was averted!” But news came that the white astrologer was troubled by each and every person saying, “Your prediction was false.” Then immediately the pan shop owner informed the astrologer of his pledge of a handful of rice. 
Now that astrologer does not need to be scared at all. Now he can confidently state, that the earth quake would have definitely occurred if the Pan shop owner would not have pledged the handful of rice. Otherwise it was a certain thing. The numerologist were right and so were all the other astrologers and an unending source to their stomachs being filled with rice was established. 
✵ ✵ ✵ This is the story how the future will be; now let’s turn towards how the future should be. 
A discussion was conducted in a foreign newspaper ‘Spectator’ on how all the problems of India would be solving future could be established, wherein a Muslim suggested that all the states of India should be handed over to a descendant of the Mughal emperor’s and he would then govern the states under the British rule well. If this is done then it will be a huge victory for the rights of the heirs. A special edition of “Law Reporter” would be necessary! 
We Maharashtrians, extend our full support to this suggestion of our Muslim brother of handing over India to a Muslim Emperor’s descendant. Because as soon as the Moghul descendant gets his heirloom, we would get one-fourth of it as a heirloom of the Peshwas, 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
and then some more as an heirloom for the Sardeshmukhs, and then almost the whole of it as heirs of Madhavrao Scindia letting the Moghul Badshah living on a pension. 
On behalf of the Hindusabha this suggestion will definitely be supported. Because now the purification has become very easy and as soon as this descendant of the Mughal emperor gets the Empire we can get him purified to a Hindu. The Chief Executive of the Hindusabha live a call away from the palace of the Emperor in Delhi. 
The British felt, the Moghul Emperor’ descendant is better than even hearing the names of the descendants any of the revolutionaries. As no English newspaper seemed to show any anger about the above suggestion; however, they showed strong reactions to the news that in the past year, whatever few revolutionary activities occurred their cases are going on in the places like Deodhar etc. It is also heard that a son of Parvatidevi from Punjab is also party to the conspiracy. An English author A.J. Walcott has attempted to explain how these high class Hindus are getting infected by the madness of trying to malign the English people. 
In the past one and half years under the heading “Indian Patriots”, Mr Walcott has published information of many conspiracies and plots of the revolutionaries. There he has of course described the Kakori action plot in much detail. Every word therein is tainted with the red ink of anger. 
We are extremely grateful to Mr. Walcott for his kind abuses for these life-sacrificing “Indian Patriots” and would have even appreciated if even he would have abused them more, but at least he made the stories of these patriots reach the European people – or at least the people of England , for which we heartily congratulate him. As opposed to the above mentioned thousands of “My Lord tales”, one story of the Indian patriots gets the ears of the English people pricked. No Hindi person is interested in telling eye – rolling tales of the revolutionaries as against that of India is a land of the poor, we are dying of hunger, etc eye watering tales. But from the kind offices of Mr Walcott the English now have seen the both sides of the Indian politics the poor as well as the rebellious. 
The difference between them is only that, when we tell these eye-opening tales amongst ourselves also we die of self shame, but if someone else is telling them we will be the first to eavesdrop. 
In the legislative assembly, when a no- trust motion was raised against the Simon Commission, then in the excitement a briefcase of a reporter from Hindustan Times fell from 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
his hands. When it fell from the press box it landed straight on Sir Blanket’s head and rendered him unconscious for a while. Although, not much harm was done. How sad! 
However one good thing that happened was, when the case of tried against the reporter, he was honest enough to state, that ‘listening to Sir Basil Blanket’s speak against the Hindi well- being, I became so excited that I did not have the sense of where and how I was placing my luggage.’ In this state of excitement I kept the briefcase in the hollow space the type writer fell down, as the hollow space was not excited enough to act against its nature! 
That reporter was punished with some prison term. Good he got some punishment, imagine what would have happened if it was not just a briefcase and he had something else in his hand! 
What if he was excited – how dare he forget that even an Englishman bones can be hurt just like a Hindi man – and even the English can get dizzy. How could he not be aware of that? 
-19 April 1928 
(9) Do not put the Turkish Girls in American Schools! 
When the Turkish realised that in their country the Turkish girls were admitted to American schools, they closed down the American Girls School in Brusa. The Turkish Government took out an order that the Turkish have to admit their girls in Turkish schools only. It is clear from this that even though Kamal Pasha doesn’t believe in the Quran himself; he used the Government order to prevent the Turkish girls from becoming Christians. Because feeling like this is not only a question of religious freedom but also about culture, national unity and the question of strength of numbers, is what Kamal Pasha thought. What a stupid man! ‘God forbid! He is neither a Hindu nor a Muslim’. This clever Kamal Pasha, what a Turkish, what Christian? For the sake of Turkey’s national unity, it would be better if your Turkish girls would give a Christians a few lectures on Non-violence. 
Hence is one of the past editions of Shraddhanand it has been said, that tomorrow even if Kamal pasha comes to rule over India, there is no telling he will not become Mohammed Ali. Even if he doesn’t accept Islam as his religion, he must have some beliefs as a Turkish culture. The young Turks only had massacred the Christians in Armenia, not because of the difference in Quran and Bible but out of differences in the philosophy, religion, nationality of Christian culture and the Turkish culture. Only for this reason purification is a mission of the Hindutva – not for difference in religious culture but just as the Turks closed down the Christian schools so that their girls should not be influenced similarly the Hindu Organisation is fighting for their protecting their girls from being influenced or being converted to 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Muslims. Those who claim that they don’t understand what purification means should learn its meaning from Kamal Pasha. 
But the ever kind India has decided to send some painters to Europe on scholarships to gain special knowledge of about art and drawing! Done. Now where is the delay in the rise of the fate of India! 
Because India’s sad condition today was due to the lack of special knowledge of drawing and art! 
All other scientific knowledge we have as per our needs. Machine guns, fighter planes, Drills, Destroyers, Submarines, Army training, Poisonous gases, anti-poisonous gas chemical training etc are very important for a strong nation and to obtain their knowledge India has already sent so many people of scholarships abroad! And as soon as they are back they have made strong battalions to protect India! All that was deficient was drawing and art! So now we are sending students abroad to learn that! And then once they are back, how Russia, or Afghanistan would would even dare to attack us! Not only that but once India learns to draw even the British troops will run away from here! 
A Muslim named Siddiq first published that he was a follower of the Hindu Lingayat Clan Founder Shri Channa Baseshwar and now in the name of Baseshwar is preaching to the Hindus the greatness of Islam saying that Islam is the best religion! Agakhan is also doing the same in the name of Kalanki! That is alright also. Because – even in Christianity there are a lot of short tales that, when initially the devil tried to preach to the people to join his sect in his own name he realised that the believers were not even ready to listen to what he was saying. He then became worried and in order to trick these believers into following him worked out a plan. Then The devil said with a wink and nod The wisest way to work my will Is to call it the will of God! 
The devil winked his eyes and nodding said, what a great Idea! Ti fulfil my devilish wishes from the people, the best way would be to project them as the wishes of God. If i put God’s name forward, these innocent people will even worship the devil! 
Using the same idea some Hassan Nizami followers are mingling with the Hindus in Mumbai, Thane etc Districts and trying to attract the population with their pretence of Hindu secularists! Where even Sita did not understand that there is a Marich hiding in the golden deer, what would the poor innocent people understand? Where Lakshman’s failed, who are we to give a warning – We only say if it is true, please be cautious! The Hindu’s should not 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
forget that one such Muslim dressed as a Hindu Brahmin had stabbed Swami Parmanand in his house. Test the coin- at least if it sounds dud throw it away. 
This warning was given to the Hindus; hence it is a must that we give a warning to the Muslim brothers too. Else ‘nationalism’ would get angry that we are discrimination between the Hindus and Muslims and spoiling their ‘Unity’! Hence we are giving a warning to the Muslims that, - 
In the last month a religious fanatic Muslim kidnapped a Hindu woman and kept her captive in his house, this is not a new thing, it is a daily occurrence. But the new thing was that, this angered the Hindus. More than that the new thing was these spoiled Hindus, got together and made a lot of riot! And the most new and amazing thing was in that riot instead of only Hindus dying a lot of Muslims were dead!!! One poor Muslim died and twenty poor Muslims were injured. Now after the riot the police did excellent redress. They arrested anyone who carried a baton and filed cases and sent them to trial. 
But even though everything is going well now, the Muslim brothers should not forget one thing, even the poorest of Hindu woman is no longer so cheap. The March 7th riot at Mathura is a warning that, even after that you feel like abducting a Hindu woman and holding her captive you may strike this deal with one Muslim head and 20 wounded Muslims in return. Because from now onwards all the Hindu products are on the rise and will inflating. 
Date – 26 April 1928 
(10) The Muslims who carried the word of Nizami. 
It was natural that, in protest of the Conference held in Pune against the ruthless and anti- Hindu rule and in order to express support to the Nizami the Muslims also held a conference in Pune. Just like jobs interviews, there should be a representation of independent and opposition in conferences too. 
In this conference, the Muslims strongly questioned that, when has a Hindu ruler appointed a Muslim as his Prime Minister, the way Nizam has appointed a Hindu as his? Show us one instance! 
This challenge of the Muslims generated doubts of whether the Muslim Divan who was recently appointed in Mysore has converted to a Hindu! In today’s Purification world, there is no assurance when a Muslim would be converted to Hindu! 
In this conference the Muslims passed a resolution that, ‘They should not let the good relation between the British Government and Nizam, due to the bickering and hue and cry created by the Hindus! We also wish the same. Inspired by ‘constant and continuous friendship and tender love’ the way a friend asks a friend, assuming everything that belongs to his friend is his and asked for Waradh ; and just as the this friend teasingly say “no I 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
won’t ‘ similarly the British showed their teeth and effused the Nizam saying “No, We won’t give”. – Not only that; the way the best friend, at short notice expects his demands to be fulfilled , the same way the British strangled the Nizam and attacking his very independent existence demanded an answer within 24 hours. We pray that such affection between them may last long! In a way it is beneficial, and even if this affection increase we have no issues. The way this British -Nizam affection reached its peak, and was united into one by Lord Curzon in Waradh, may it happen in Hyderabad also and sweeten the mouths of are Muslims brothers in Pune!! 
The Muslim newspaper “Mublik Akhabar” writes in its December 1st issue that, A great man from Punjab, Mr Mohammed Farooq, the editor of the newspaper ‘Ulam - i – Islam’ sent the following telegram to the Governor of Punjab and put forth an important demand of the Muslims. ‘The way Islam is against idol worship and seeing the processions of Hindu Idols naturally angers them, and hence the Government should prohibit the processions of the Hindu idols to pass from the Masjids and also the Muslim shops. The Government is just and before the Muslims anger erupts we hope that Government will approve this demand and satisfy them.’ – (Arjun) 
We are grateful to the editor “Mr. Mohammed Farooq’ for showing the courage of making this demand. This is a good example of how little we come to know of what is happening in the Muslim newspapers as what was printed in the December 1st edition we came to know today after approximately six months! The idol worship of Hindus and their idol processions should not pass from near, in front of are beside the Muslim as it is against their religion! That the Muslims clearly expressed this demand of theirs so many times is a great favour that they did on the Hindus. 
Really it is a great favour on the Hindus. Because when the Muslims said that we are Muslims and hence would not fight our religious Khalifa, the Turk then the Hindus supported their statements on the same religious grounds. Then the concept that Muslims religious constraints are also applicable to the Hindus was proven. We are not fighting the Khalifa because they are against the Muslim religion. We would not allow blowing the conch or ringing the bells, in front of our mosques, but also not next to our house, because it is against the Muslim religion. This basic principles born from such a thought process, were agreed to stop playing their instruments in front of the Masjids by some Hindus who preached Hindu – Muslim unity and, hence we should also stop idol worship because that is also against the Muslim religion and we assumed that would be the next demand of the Muslims which they will not miss. Then these innocent Hindus, got angry with us and said, “Shut up, Our Muslim brothers are not such terrorists you Hindus are nasty; or you would not have got such doubts!’ But some of our Muslim brothers from Punjab proved our logic true! That is why we said we are very grateful to them. 
“As soon as they said stop the music, the softer than butter Hindus appointed a committee and asked for opinions of the Maulavis, ‘Are the Musical instruments really against Islam?’ 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Now these gentlemen will again appoint a committee on the question of Idol worship and as soon as they give their opinion that Idol worship is against Islam, they will accept the plea of the Punjabi gentlemen and stop not only the music but also the idol processions not only in front of the Mosques, but also in front of the shops, besides, in front, behind, above, below the Muslims for the benefit of the Hindu-Muslim unity. ‘The Hindus will also take into consideration the feelings of our most dear Muslim brothers on not only stopping the music but also giving up Idol worship’ – We hope our best that this proposal will be passed in the next National Congress. 
The National Congress has already taken into consideration the demand for stopping the music, then this year , they should consider and approve stopping the idol worship, then next year the demand for stopping the thread ceremony, on the same principles of the common and National Congress approvals are based on the same principle that thread ceremonies are also against the Muslim religion. This way one by one all the issues that are creating a divide between the Hindus and Muslims will be resolved and convert all the Hindus to Muslims and gain the merit of achieving National Good soon. 
Actually before the music and idols the Muslims should have first stopped the thread ceremonies. Because the biggest enemy of their ‘Taboot’ if any is the thread ceremony. 
It is a very natural thing that the Muslims expect that the Hindus should decide whether a thing is good and bad depending on the fact whether it is existent in Islam or not. But this Arya Samaj always created obstacles and now that organisation is coming to age! 
The Muslims naturally said, Confiscate Satyarthprakash (Light of Truth), because it has condemned some of the Muslim opinions. Immediately the Arya Samaj and the like Organisations started shouting, confiscate the Quran! As it contains a lot of things against the Hindu religion. What a nasty behaviour of these Organisations! Does such comparison create national unity! 
Hence we fear that these organisations will create some new problem for the new demand of the Muslims of “Stop Idol worship!”! And who can tell, as soon as the Muslim editor sends a telegram, “In our religion Idol worship is banned, hence along with the musical instruments even the idol processions should not pass our shops, some Arya Samaji editor would sent a telegram that , ‘Stop burying dead bodies’ because it is against the Hindu religion. Hence any good or bad son of parents who have buried a body should not pass in front of our shops!’ Is it that only the Muslim editor does can send a telegram and not the Hindu editors! 
Some Muslim named Sayyad’s daughter from Sindh, married the Quran! May she be blessed with eight kids! 
We are now scared of the ghosts of the printing press because of these ‘Eight sons’. Once in the past when the word was not written correctly or so to say the proof reader found it 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
ineligible the word was misprinted. This is just to warn that such a mistake should not happen while printing the above blessing. 
As it is there is currently an epidemic of unusual marriages. Seeing Quran getting married this way, the Puranas also could not sit quietly. They also got married at two three places. 
Because of late there are lot of news about European girls converting to Hinduism and getting married to Hindus. A 23 year old German girl named Gruven Half converted to Hinduism through the hands of Swami Satyanandji and married a Hindu Mr Kiranchandra Bagh. The girl was named Indubala. Sweets were distributed after the wedding and it needs a mention that most of the Hindus present ate them. An English woman named Mrs. Roberts has also accepted the Hindu religion. She is building a temple at Varanasi in the memory of her husband. The story of Sharmishtha Devi is famous across three continents. 
It is not a new thing that European girls are marrying Hindus, it has been happening before also. From America to Russia, wherever there is Hindu population a peek into their houses proves this. But until now when a European girl got married to a Hindu man, generally instead of the girl coming home, the boy would leave the house becoming a Christian and went to the girl’s house. But now instead the girls came to stay with the boy’s families. In the past, the boys used to run after the bible, but now the newest of Christian girls run after our Puranas. As the saying goes, every dog has its day! It’s going well! All is well! 
✵ ✵ ✵ 
Now-a-days it seems the Statues of the English Greats in India have fallen on bad days. In Punjab, all the men, women and children of the city of Lahore should gather to remove the statue of Lawrence–only gather, was the order given to them by Gandhiji during one of his hundreds of the experiments of truth. But what was more difficult than moving the statue was moving the whole of Lahore. Suddenly someone had a bright idea; he went during the night and broke the sword in the hand of Lawrence’s statue. The government immediately covered the statue with a curtain of shame. They wiped off all the objectionable, abusive sentences from the statue and silenced the issue. What was to be achieved by moving the whole of Lahore was achieved by the movement of one person. Then Madras got angry on the statue of Neil. But there the issue was whether to hit the stone statue with stones or sledge- hammer, and would that be violence or non- violence! Finally it was decided that throwing mud on the statue would be appropriate and then the issue is still stuck in that mud. 
Then – A telegram has been received from Mumbai; someone has molested the statue of Queen Victoria by breaking the royal spectre from her hand! 
Suddenly the man from Mumbai had attacked the Royal spectre! There was no agenda of gathering all the men and women like there was in Lahore, neither was there a plan to use the non-violent mud. Eccentric fellow! What do these people get by creating unnecessary trouble? 
www.savarkarsmarak.com The clever people were bust scratching their heads over this. Then the brainy policemen came up with an intelligent reason to how the royal spectre was broken. And the announced that ‘while cleaning the statue, the royal spectre slipped with the force of water from the cleaner’s water sprayer. It was just an accident’. So be it! If it is not anything else, it is better for all. 
Because in the past also, this statue had to face torture, or in English the statue was shown a boot. In India, the trend to molest the statues was first set twenty-five to thirty years ago when this statue was molested. 
It was the second day of Queen Victoria’s festival. Accurately on that day someone spoiled pinkness of the atmosphere, by smearing tar on the statue breaking into the guard watch and garlanding the statue with torn slippers! Later, thousands of rupees had to be spent to remove the tar and clean the statue. The brave man who did this, his name was on everyone’s lips. It was later proved that the Chaphekar brothers who killed Officer Rand, who molested people in Pune during the Plague epidemic, had molested the statue. 
This past history gave importance to the news that again the statue was molested. Otherwise who is bothered about a spectre in the hand of a stone statue! 
However, the spectre fell because of the water sprayer, was a simple and convenient to all explanation is a good thing. 
But if the royal spectre fell how come no one found it? It flew with the force of water and is it still flying? And why did the servant run away and the Orb in the other hand was cracked, did that also happen due to the water spray? 
But these questions are secondary. Their satisfactory answers can be provided at anytime. Now we have to be careful, that we have to strengthen this explanation that the spectre flew with the water force and hence forth instead of giving spectres that will flow with the water spray the statues should be given stronger spectres. The slipping of royal spectres, even from the hands of a statue, is considered as a bad omen by innocent people. What else? 
- Date 24th May,1928 
(11) Gandhiji and the British angry by the words Total National Freedom. 
Last December, in Madras the National Congress declared that the aim of India is ‘Total National Independence’ and that is the correct meaning of the word ‘Swaraj’. Two people were extremely angry of the resolution of ‘Freedom’ passed that day. Two people considered the resolution as ‘childish, impossible, and crazy’ and were extremely distressed. Those two were one the English and the second, other person was our Gandhiji!!! The national aim of India was ‘Total Independence’ this angering the British was understandable. In such cases it happens. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
For example, recently when a professional thief was asked to return all the wealth he had looted to the person he had robbed it from, by a judge in Mumbai, the thief who was honestly going about practicing his profession was also angry the same way! He also said that, I have earned this wealth by dropping my own sweat. What praise is applicable to the white collared men, is also applicable to my efforts. Nobody came and left this wealthy man’s wealth at my pillow; but when this man was sleeping on the seventh floor, I climbed up the height with all my strength. 
The height that I too reached and kept! Was not attained by a sudden flight!! But I while honest men had slept! Was toiling upwards in the night!! 
If it was natural that the thief was angry, then wasn’t it natural that the British being angry about the Independence resolution? They also naturally say that, ‘our ancestors have dropped their sweat, to get this Indian empire. The empire of Satara, Zhansi, Lahore, Poona, Ayodhya - each and every one. So many Crowns, Thrones, Gems, Rubies, Rupees, - if we had to only pick it up and fill our treasures, even the strongest of strong Bheem would have got tired! But we have first have looted all this by our strength and then picked it and stored in our treasures! Not only that, we have now given all this loot a name of an Empire. Once the loot is called an Empire, even then you are asking us to return it to the owner! After four generations you are claim your right to this Empire! How unjust is that! Just because we don’t say anything, else you know the number 121? That 121 number! If it’s straight its straight, else it becomes as crooked as the neck of time! Do not forget that!’ 
Of the two people who were angered by the Freedom resolution – The British and Gandhi – it was natural that the British got angered, most people understood that. But Mahatma Gandhi, - a born Indian, a patriot who set out to get freedom in one year, as soon as India decided to throw off the bounds of the British rule, why should he get so angry, this puzzled many. His followers also could not solve this puzzle. Two three men amongst them, ensuring no one was within hearing distance were whispering, ‘What is this? Freedom is a basic right of all nations, persons just like life. Gandhiji, who considered the British Rule as devilish, why should this just man, get angry and not like the freedom resolution! This is contradictory to his past history!’ 
But the key to this puzzle would be discovered in his past was not known to the people who knew him just for the past six-seven years. That is why they are deceived. Not only Gandhiji’s past character but his present character also has been documented chronologically and that too by himself! See what he says in his autobiography! 
The tussle between the Zulu people and British had started. The Zulu’s had not done anything to the Indians, nor was Gandhi understanding what they had done to the British. Rather the whole world knew that it was the British who had snatched the Zulus’ wild freedom, and threatened them with their English nails! But the British attacked the Zulus. The British were the rulers of India; Gandhiji was a son of India, in that sense a subject of 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
the British; then when the British attacked the Zulus then Gandhiji had to ask his followers to obey the orders of his favourite Emperor! He went along with the British as volunteers for the attack. He was watching the British being crueler than animals in killing the Zulus. It was clear that the British were taking away the freedom of the Zulus. But the kind Gandhi did not resign from his job as a volunteer from the British army! The way his heart would pine for the British kingdom that even the brutal killings of the Zulus could not be deter his love This is one experiment of Truth. 
Let us not speak about the Boer War. To attack the freedom of that strong country, these sons of India, themselves losing their freedom at the hands of the British, honestly and inherent slave qualities pushed their way into the British Army! Not one or two but they took along another fifty sixty people with them! The whole world was pained by the loss of the Boers in the war of independence, and shunned the British victory. But the British awarded all those whose hands were covered with the blood of the Zulus, and then Gandhiji also received one and a medal too – he wore that honest and flattering belt of Slavery with great pride around his neck. This was the second experiment. 
Even then this self enslaved person who lost his own freedom, went about the whole world trampling other persons freedom for the third person who had in the first place had enslaved him and taken his freedom. These were the experiments of truth that went on in the Beautiful Africa. Only the actual India remained to be vaccinated by this truth serum. Then very kindly in order to display these experiments of truth in India at the time of the last world war, this person who sold his own honour and loyalty to the British Empire - i.e. India’s Slavery - began his exhibition of dishonest stupidity in India. At the time of the World war, Lokmanya Tilak’s National Party was trying to acquire as many Indian rights as possible from the British taking advantage of the World war and on the other hand the Abhinav Bharat Revolutionary organisation was trying to take over the royal spectre, that held all the rights, and shouting “kingdom by strength” blowing away the planned plots was entering the war zone; at that time Gandhiji writes in his autobiography or “Experiments of Truth” that, ‘At that time I was faced with the question, what do I have to do with this war of Germany......According to a lot of Indians, these English are our molester lords, we are slaves because of this relation between us, we should take advantage of their crisis and make way towards our freedom, but how could this decision go down my throat! Because I did not find my condition to be like that of a slave. My belief was that, it is the fault of the way the British rule and of most British Officers. These faults can be removed with love. The rule was faulty, but it was not as unbearable then as it seems today. But today, as much as I have lost confidence and faith on the rule, those who felt that way then began trying to get as many rights to freedom as possible at that time. How would they support the British? But I found the idea of let alone snatching our rights, but even demanding them at the time of their crisis very uncivilised and short-sighted. And I decided that giving England unconditional support as our first and foremost duty.’ To fulfil this ‘far-sighted and righteous duty’ Gandhiji first gathered around 80 men and started applying for their permits to volunteer in the army. But finally within the crowd of thousands of men, the clever British politicians found that these handfuls of innocent Indians were like a poppy seeds in the sea; and they would be more useful in India to destroy the plans of Lokmanya Tilak’s National 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Party. Hence they immediately diverted these ‘far-sighted and righteous volunteers to India. These righteous, decent truth dramas are extremely famous. This non-violence became a ‘Volunteer recruiting officer’ that sent the poor farmers’ army from India to be sent to the British Army’s butchery to kill the Germans in the armed war! The old code of ethics sometimes writes, ‘violence for the religion is not violence. The violence done to protect the decent people is non-violence’. The old definition is wrong, the Mahatma who claims unexceptional non- violence is the only non-violence now defines non-violence as follows, Violence undertaken for the British Empire is not violence! The violence involved in recruiting men to kill the Germans, Zulus’ Boers’, who ever were fighting against the British empire is acceptable to the righteous unexceptional non-violence! 
During the Last World War, Gandhiji tried to create as many obstacles as possible in the plans of the National Party and was a little successful. The British only expected that he would be able to hinder Lokmanya Tilaks’ work. Because they knew that the revolutionaries did not find Mahatma Gandhi’s non-violent righteous and far-sight, worth a penny. 
The above paragraph from Gandhiji’s autobiography anyone can very clearly understand why Gandhiji was extremely angry about the Freedom resolution passed at the National Congress in Madras. If the ones who don’t know his past and mountainous blundering traditions, are shocked so be it. 
In this same paragraph he says, what he thought as righteous nonviolent far- sighted theories at the time of the world war, he doesn’t not find them to be so today. That means he accepted that the people who were tell him at that time that his ‘righteous’ far-sighted’ theories and attitude were wrong were correct and twenty – twenty-five years ago, what those people clearly saw was blurry to Gandhiji’s far-sighted vision. Such short-sighted is his political far-sight! In his ‘experiments of eternal truth’ if anything was proved true was that whatever he believed to be true was mostly false. He does not possess the investigative outlook and attitude needed for experimenting with truth, what he says is true today, tomorrow he himself claims as a mountainous blunder. Today’s truth, tomorrows’ mountainous blunder; tomorrow’s truth, the day afters’ mountainous blunder and the ending series continues. 
Seeing this tradition the Madras Resolution that is called by Gandhiji as childish and short- sighted today, tomorrow he himself will come forward and call his comments as childish and the fact that he made them a Himalayan Mistake. But that is after some years! What the world sees today, he sees after a few years! Far-sighted! A vision that shows the past closer when gone far ahead! 
The only reason to keep repeating this bore fact over and over again is that some of his followers still looked puzzled and dazed at the fact that he opposed the Madras resolution. The person who doesn’t know the truth sits and does the experiments is understandable but those why sit and experiment the freedom is a right of the nation, just like life is for a person, when we can clearly see that freedom is a natural, birth right and a national truth which is as clear as sunlight why sir and experiment with it! The truth that Abhinav Bharat 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
saw twenty five years ago, that truth Gandhiji is seeing today. There is not even a small fault of his in it. But as in politics similarly in religion his far-sight was a short–sight. As a result of that he himself commits actions today that he would himself tomorrow see as disgusting and claim to be Himalayan blunders. After this has been proved over and over again from his truth experiments in the autobiography from time to time, then it is the fault of the innocent people to make this blurred vision, a stump in the path of our national growth. As much it is a fault of the blind leaders as it is of the blindly following people. 
But fortunately and such repeated bold discoveries of blunders has led to eradication of this blunder disease from most of our country, which is a good thing. India’s am is Total Independence! Even though Mahatma Gandhi and the British did not like this, the whole of India without bothering the former’s lifeless curses and the latter’s whiplashes has come forward to pledge complete loyalty at the feet of the motherland! Be it the Kerala regional conference and its President Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru’s speech there, see the Karnataka conference and its President Nariman’s Speech or the Maharashtra conference and its President Subhash Babu’s speech, everywhere the Freedom Deity has received an ovation! Where the Freedom drum beats so loud what is the sound of the British loyalty’s tom-tom in front of that! 
This ovation of the freedom deity was once heard before in the inner sanctum of the Indian motherland’s temples though it did not have a wider pavilion, but the inner sanctum resonated with the ovation! This roar- the roar of the Abhinav Bharat – today has resonated the inner sanctum and spilled out to the out pavilion! Best! But – but..... 
But there is yet a big difference left. A huge void has to be filled! You all have resolved that Independence is the only aim. You decided it is achievable, Oh Maharashtra-Karnataka- Kerala, and Banga! Oh India, you just passed a resolution as achievable! But why no one uttered a word about the means of achieving the same? 
When we have not gathered the things needed for the Pooja of the freedom deity in the inner sanctum, nor has anyone uttered a word a single word about collecting them, till then these empty roars and ovations in the pavilion won’t suffice to celebrate the festival of Freedom! Without offerings and sacrifices how is this Freedom deity going to be pleased? 
Hence Beware! There is no resolution for the means – hence beware! Or else again some other person will start using some other means – that shameless non-violence the love for others benefits, that traitor, justice traitor, impartiality – all those who worshipped injustice during the past World War, under the pretence of decency and justice, all those can today also take advantage of some golden opportunity and create the same pretences. That is why there is a need to keep searching them all the time! And keep warning them that – 
The resolution to achieve is passed but let’s talks about means now? Because that is the main glitch! Well at least we have a thin ray of hope directed by Punjab. ‘Total Independence is our aim, and whatever it takes to achieve it is the means! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
The resolution is passed successfully in the pavilion. But now let’s steps into the inner sanctum, the main material for the Pooja is needed there, but there is not a single flower or a single thing there not even single burning amber there for this ritual to be successfully performed! 
- Date 28th June 1928 
(12) Why did the Martyr’s die in Andaman? 
Some days ago one person told us that, a great man from Kanpur, who found justification of his Being Hindu, by constantly showering abuses on the Hindu organisations and calling the agitations by the Dr. Munje and Kelkar’s organisations as anti-national, and who was in eagerly in favour of handing over the Sindh region to the Muslims as a place to rest, and who sent his criticism to Shraddhanand’s editor for opposing the resolution of Total independence, angered by the same Shraddhanand asked the critic that, how come the so called self-proclaimed ‘martyrs’ ask for leniency – why did they not die a prison death? Not only that why did the even plead to the Government? 
In fact, the editor of Shraddhanand never appealed to the Government for his freedom – let alone for forgiveness. That is why we first thought of informing this gentleman from Kanpur he has confused himself with some other guy with the same name as the editor of Shraddhanand and made this mistake. 
But on second thoughts, since he has specifically mention Martyr and strongly questioned why he asked for leniency. That means he did not make this mistake by oversight. All those who are worshipped in our country today as Martyrs according to our knowledge none of these great martyrs has asked for leniency. Yes however, one thing is well known that from Punjab to Pondicherry and from Sindh to Bengal hundreds of revolutionaries - who held their heads in their hands and turned their backs on their family went on to run the family of their motherland and happily entered into the National Freedom Struggle’s ovation, the valley of Death and that got injured in that war after bearing years of torture, and in order to be able to serve the motherland again, accepted the condition of the British of giving up the struggle and got their freedom. What if they are called Martyrs and what if their acceptance of the condition is being called as request for leniency? Then what! Such Martyrs, whose bravery, selflessness and dedication even impressed the British oppressors; - they are asked why did you not die in the prison? Who is this great man to question them this – and then what really amazed us and stopped us in our tracks is that even while such great men are alive in Kanpur, how is it that the Army Commander–in Chief who is just about two metres away is still alive! 
Even when Shivaji fell in the hands of the enemy, he could not accept to do the brave act of suicide. How many applications he would have sent have no count. He pleaded at the feet of Aurangzeb, he hoodwinked Aurangzeb and escaped and he set up the throne of his Hindu 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Kingdom right on Aurangzeb’s chest. But the coward did not sacrifice his life in the Delhi Prison by giving up food. He just could not gather the courage to do that, where would Shivaji have the brains to achieve all that by sacrificing his life? He faced Afzalkhan with folded handed, he had lion claws in his hand but with folded hands! What should we condemn more his cunning that he carried lion claws or his cowardice that he went there with folded hands! We were scared and doubtful, that now even Shivaji’s credibility will be questioned, as he did not wear the bracelet of non-violence, and under the banner of truth reveal all the places where our army was hiding to Afzalkan, or lie down in this path calling it the Satyagraha, and wished how nice it would have been if Shivaji would have worn the Gandhi cap on his head, because who else can think of such bravery and cunning, but a person who dorns that Gandhi cap and warms his head with it? Because if I was present in the times of Shivaji and Pratap I, would have named the armed revolt of their times as criminal, as told by the Non-violence while killing the Germans for the British! The readers of “Young India” should be aware of this. 
However, even though Shivaji, hidden in the cellars of the past, escaped, today’s revolutionary called the “Brave warrior”, who is referred and praised as the Morning star of Indian Independence by Sarojini Naidu, and called by the opposition as the Prince of Indian revolutionists, from that martyr to yesterday’s Kakori’s national hero Ramprasad Bismil, Sanyal, etc killers to those who were hanged or are sentenced to life imprisonment (Living Death) all have applied to the Government. From Satyendra to Kakori heroes everyone has applied for their death sentences to be commuted. But no one ever questioned them that why they did not accept death in the prison. But today as soon as we came to know that, such a person is born in Kanpur who dares to question the Prince of Indian revolutionists, we were spellbound with wonder and questions like, who this human extraordinaire was, how did he look, and what are his such great brave acts! 
We thought, ‘Who is this reincarnation of a man, is he a brave warrior or has God himself taken birth on this land!’ 
Then we read the news in Calcutta’s “Swatantra” newspaper of the 4th August, that there is some Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi, an editor of the Paper “ Pratap” of Kanpur. He has asked for forgiveness on the charges of defamation of the Government Court. When the Chief justice did not release him just on his repentance, then he asked for Unconditional apology and obtained his freedom by his triple apology and after paying the Government expenses of the trial! 
As soon as we read the news, we understood that Yes! The human extraordinaire is no one else but this great editor of ‘Pratap’ from Kanpur. Sure an extraordinaire! How will he know the difference between his horns and Kesari’s nails without experiencing them! 
Because on a low life can dare to question a Martyr why you didn’t die in prison! Fools rush where angels fear to tread! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
While fighting for the freedom of his country, if he fell into the trap of the enemy, in order to be released from the prison in order to join the fight for freedom more actively, if some Revolutionary from Kakori applies for Government leniency, only a extraordinaire, who forget life, but even if he has to go to prison for a year or two, on let alone the charge of armed revolt – but on a simple charge of defamation of the Court – gets boggled and starts licking the enemy’s feet, would dare to laugh at him! 
However, Oh Editor of Pratap! Just to show you how and what a low life you look from the other side of the jealous binoculars you have dared to use reversely to look at the Martyrs, we sadly but helplessly have used the same! 
And so before we take your leave we are throwing aside the jealousy cracked binoculars and telling you that when you seeked the forgiveness from the Court, you may have been right under those circumstances. If you follow the example of the Martyrs you will realise that, ...........................! 
At the same time we feel it is our duty to mention here that the way you have written about trial going on about the torture executed on the prisoners in the Nainital prison, and your intention of writing that way was to free the people of their anxiety and before in the past also your paper ‘Pratap’ has done exceptional service of the impartial public. Because we also feel that the way others should consider both the positive and negative side and behave justly, similarly we also try to behave in the same fashion as much as possible. 
We will discuss on what you write about Mahatma Gandhi at a later time and that to then if and when we want to question Gandhiji about it. We know Mahatma Gandhi and he also knows us. Till date we have been minding our own business, and will look after ourselves in future also, No Tom, Dick, or Ganesh has the right to poke his nose in it. Calling non- violence shameless and Gandhiji shameless are two different things, why talk to anyone who doesn’t have the brains to understand the difference. We will answer Mahatmaji later. Today that great patriot is fighting a war in Bardoli, and the strategy he is using is suitable to the best able commander, and it is our duty to as much as possible stand united shoulder to shoulder in any national struggle, we are currently saying only such things and behaving in such a manner that will support and help Mahatmaji and in the National interest we would oppose only whenever and as much as needed if there is any sabotage. “When facing the enemy we all stand united” this should be everyone’s motto; it is ours, has some Ganesh would have at least understood that? 
(13) All Party Conference is bigger that National Congress 
Pandit Motilal Nehru says that. “I find All Party Conference more important than the National Congress.”In one way it’s true. Because the All Party conference is truly the National Congress – A true representation and complete image of the country. The revolutionaries did not accept the old National Congress’s pleading rule or the new khadi rule’s orders as the National orders, sighting the same reason. All party Conference in a true sense is a 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
representative organisation of the National Congress; its resolution may not be progressive but is surely representative. 
But when and where did Nehru hear this resolution? We are not even aware of the resolution, or Formation of a all party conference – nor do we see a possibility of it. Because amongst all these parties the one revolutionary party that is actively and fighting for the nation with their life has not received any invitation and nor has anyone sent them one. And assuming that the name of this conference is self-explanatory if this party enters the gate of this conference it is clear that all these progressive, global and submissive etc. parties will run away from the back door - the same door the Metha Chief used to run away in Surat – and disappear. 
Let alone the Revolutionary party, but the National Congress cannot even tolerate Jawarlal’s independent party or accept it. Even though poor Jawahar’s independent organisation never even utters the name of means of freedom. In the resonating sound of the dispute about ‘what is wanted’ the very utterance of ‘how it is to be obtained’, is to be buried. And this newest of new ‘Swatantrya Sangh’ (Independent Organisation) has not broken the oldest tradition of all these parties. We want rights, the moderates said, the extremists said, we want independence and we want freedom, is what the Jawaharlal said; none of them ever had the far-sightedness of thinking or planning how they will get it! We want Freedom! But are we some ‘Lunatic’ to think of the means to achieve it? Getting the means of freedom can be done in a wink! This can be done somehow – we can see to that later! Other than a lunatic who else is so eager or free do think about it! If the intelligent people waste a week trying to pronounce and re-pronounce the words ‘freedom’ and ‘independence’ back and forth in the parliament that is enough! 
However just like before performing any Vedic ritual it is important that you utter the mantras correctly, similarly at least now people have learned to pronounce the aim with proper diction and stance. We should thank the young Pandit Jawaharlal and the veteran Pandit Ayengar for this. They brought the mantra that originated in the secret chamber of sacrifice and purified in the sacred fire, and placed it on the National Congress’s throne. 
But the self-destroying bad luck that sat on the National Congress’s throne till date, she obviously started getting scared and jealous. That is exactly why we should be careful that the shadow of this bad luck should not fall on the throne of the National Congress at least for one or two years. The Mahamantra of Freedom should be printed on the National Congress’s flag, National Congress’s throne and embellished on the minds and hearts of Nation constantly! We showed not forget the warning of Lord Govinda, ‘Otherwise that wicked witch, getting a chance, will definitely harm us’. 
The young Jawahar became a connoisseur of Freedom is not an amazing thing. But the veteran saint and seer Shriman Ayengar should become eligible for this title is incredible! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
For those in doubt, Ayengar was the Government’s Advocate General in the past! So be it! Previously the leaders of the National Congress while climbing the steps of the national devotion reached the presidency of the National Congress after stepping on the seat of the High Court judge. Today Ayengar is stepping down from the Government dependency and picking up the flag of the National Independence. Rather than following the tradition of first being a president of the National Congress and then gaining the Judgeship it is much more worth following the example of Mr. Ayengar to first be the Advocate General and then free oneself from those bounds and then follow the path of the divine aim for the National Freedom. 
If Ayengar insisted on the aim of Independence, then some feel it would create a divide in the National Congress! Let us happily permit the Nehru report. This permission should ideally be given only as a temporary solution to the demanders of Freedom. However if anyone tries to pull down the flag of Total Independence raised at the Madras Convention, then without being scared of the scarecrow of the divide, all the youth of this Nation should join hands under the leadership of Shriman Ayengar and united fight this problem. The Unity should be in the interest of the nation. It should be for National redemption – not to tie the nation permanently to the wheel of the British Empire! 
It is better to be united in redeeming the nation with sloth less hard work than to imitate fifty lazy bones and yourself become a good for thing. Rather than unite with ten cowards and become a coward it is better to go against all those and individually try and do whatever one can in the benefit of the country. Rather than screaming with millions and millions of people that ‘My motherland is the certified mistress of the British Empire’ is it not better to revolt against this entire disillusioned crowd and keep shouting alone? This motherland of mine will not even for namesake be a mistress of anybody! She will not tolerate someone else’s stamp on her national emblem! She wishes to be free! Or she wishes to die fighting!! At least that is the message she gave me! 
Previously even Surat was being strangulated by the resolution of freedom under the veil of unity. But Tilak declaring that the unity that back stabs the nation is not true unity, did not let the flag of Independence fall down. Accordingly, when freedom is being defined as a dependent, existence of a satellite of the British Orbit, without its army, navy and air force, an uncrowned, crippled institutional existence, and then not thousands but even lakhs of people get disillusioned and ask you to be a similar disillusioned coward, it would be better to break away from these people and uphold the flag of Independence with your own hands alone until head rolls to the ground. In such a condition Unity is a sin, and revolt is a pious duty. 
The gentlemen who have sat Khilafat on their heads for the Muslims to unite today are howling in the name of that unity against Independence. The eclipse of dependency that has shrouded the National congress was over with the Madras convention, and in order to see that it doesn’t start again all those in favour of Independence should support Mr Ayengar etc. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com Ayengar is trying to snatch the leadership from Nehru by hailing for the Independence! But what is wrong in that? Tilak also supported the Swadeshi movement because he could not bear the leadership from Gokhale and Metha! Don’t the folklores say so! But the nation benefitted from the same so the leadership rightly went to Tilak. The same situation applies today; Motilal Nehru may or may not try to sabotage the resolution for Independence – some other people bought by the British relations may try to do so, then in the name of Independence it is right that Ayengar should try to snatch away their leadership. We cannot blame those who are trying hard, not to let the leadership go to those, who just want the leadership! 
-Date: 13th December, 1928. 
(14) Lathi charge on Lalaji 
Cornering Lala Lajpatrai in an unarmed state, and for his sin of trying to help his poor, needy, and weak brothers and relieving them of their sorrow, the arrogant British Lathis injured him. But if they would have stopped after just injuring Lalaji, they would have followed only half of what the Bible commands. They had the good fortune of proving the future predicted in their Bible true. What the ‘Prophets of Old’ said is not true, after beating up Lalaji for ‘Should come to pass’ they appointed a committee, Saying none of us did such a beating they started questioning Lalaji as to you tell us who beat you up? Let us see if you can recognise them? Let us see if you really have that much intellect and courage or no? 
“For all this came to pass as foretold.” Because all this was happened just as written in their Religious book The Bible. That Christian officer believed in the Bible. It was the duty of the disciples of Jesus, to follow each word written in the Bible its teachings and history to the T. Hence the ‘Boyd Committee’ was appointed. Because this act has been described in advance exactly as it happened in the Bible and in it is clearly said that, “Then they spat at him in his face and did buffet him, They smote him in the face with the palms of their hands and jeeringly asked; prophesy unto us, oh Christ, who of us smote thee!!” 
This couplet describes perfectly the future of the Simon commission and Boyd Committee! Bible is really a futuristic epic. The British Government is truly Christian. And as the above prediction is about the recent incidence the word Christ used is referred to Lalalji. As the Boyd committee used the very sentence and asked “Prophesy unto us, oh Lalaji, who of us smote thee!!” 
- Date 20 December 1928 
(15) The two conferences at Varanasi The Monkey conference and the Unproductive conference 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
The detailed report has reached the readers about the two conferences held in Varanasi at the same time. 
Out of those the first one was held near the Gyanvapi (The Well of Knowledge) was the Monkey conference and the other was the held near the Well of Ignorance was the Brahmin Conference. This told in a more practical manner, would be the first was a monkey conference and the second a Unproductive conference. 
The summary of the news printed about the Monkey conference in the newspapers of Varanasi is as follows: Some days ago, the electrical wires were set up across the streets in Varanasi. On all the previous wires, be it the fence, or net the monkeys of Varanasi have been sitting on them for generations. Sitting on the fence, at times swinging from them has become the very nature of the monkeys. As it was not harming them in any way, this practice had become a communal practice or custom for them. When the electrical wire first came, then they did not know about them, but they went haywire after receiving the electric shocks, when they customarily started swinging from the wires. Initially they did not understand why this was happening. They were very confused. Finally to ponder over this problem and investigate it they decided to have a conference and find a unanimous solution to it. Hundreds of monkeys gathered on a field. They went about chattering amongst for a long time and God knows what they decide; but an old monkey amongst them jumped away from them. The whole gathering watched him with concentration. He slowly climbed the pole with the new wires. Then he slowly stretched his hand and tried to quickly touch the wires. Naturally he got some electric shocks. He immediately climbed down from the pole and mixed with the congregation. Again there was some monkey chatter and from that day onwards all the monkeys suddenly stopped climbing on such type of wires. This news is not a figment of our imagination, but it actually happened as all the newspaper readers are aware. 
After reading the above news as it happened in the newspaper, in order to find out the minute objective behind this monkey conference we sent our reporter Mr. Mankavade there. He entered within the hearts and minds of the monkeys and the report he sent us is given below. Obviously if readers call it the figment of his imagination we would not impede on them, because the ability that Mr Mankavade possesses, of entering someone’s mind and reading his thoughts is not there with everybody. He writes: The monkeys had gathered in a conference to find out why the previous so harmless looking wires were causing these accidents. Amongst them some monkey named Hanuman suggested that, maybe these wires are filled with some harmful substance. These wires may be different from the old wires. On hearing this monkey speak, another one named Puchwan angrily said, “No way! What an unreasonable doubt. If there was a possibility of such horrible wires being there, then would the all knowing ancestors not told us about it before only? When we see a wire we hang on it, this is the age old practice that we have followed without fail. But such accidents never happened. Hence suspecting the wires is useless. It is an insult of our all knowing ancestors! On hearing the words of this objector monkey, an old monkey named Shirshavan said, “Now there is no doubt, why this objector’s parents named him ‘Pucchwan’.” Instead of thinking with his head he is thinking with his tail, as it is clear from 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
this objection that it has originated from his tail and not from his head! Oh idiot, you yourself are saying, and seeing that, such new accidents did not happen till today, then what the all knowing ancestors did not know and what has occurred today is what we have to bear, hence is treating them as mere accidents also an insult to the ancestors? And if you accept that these events are new then you also have to accept that addressing this new problem today, is not an insult to the ancestors. No more of that. For once and for all we have to check if these new wires are different from the old ones. I will step ahead. I will check before you what the reason behind the accidents from these new wires is. For the betterment of the community even if I have to bear some electric shocks or even lay down my life, not a problem!’ On hearing the words of Shirshavan all the monkeys applauded him and sent him on this mission. He, as told in the above news checked the wires and decided that the new wires contained some harmful substance and the only way to save themselves from the accidents was to establish a new tradition of not touching those wires again. He conveyed his opinion to all the others on returning back. ‘The conditions have changed’. We have to now to commit a new rule to our memory, of not treating all the wires as harmless!’ 
As soon as Shirshavan said “The conditions have changed”, Pucchwan got angry and said, ‘What Rubbish! The word Condition is unscientific! What is the condition, and if it changes how to adapt to it, to think about it is against the Monkey religion!’ Listening to him all the monkeys started rolling with laughter and said, ‘To not take into consideration the change in the conditions, are we Varanasi’s Rajeshwar Shastri! Oh this Puchhwan does not understand anything! How Human! Hearing these shameful curses Pucchwan cringed down and all the monkeys followed the new rule of not touching the wires and adapted to the change. 
While this monkey conference was going on one side, on the other side the some selective Brahmins of Varansai were gathered for their unproductive conference. A lot of Brahmins from across India had gathered there. The resolutions passed by them are already published everywhere. The suggestions of Pucchwan, rejected with disgust in the Monkey conference were passed as resolutions in the Brahmin Conference. There when one follower of the Shirshavan monkey said, ‘the conditions have changed! And we the interpretations of our Scriptures should be such that they would make us able to adapt the change. Only depending on the Scriptures is not Rational thinking, acting without rational thinking is more harmful to the science!! 
- Then and so that this suggestion should not be heard all the Brahmins gathered there started shouting all at once and said, “ Rubbish! The word Condition is unscientific! We cannot even take into consideration words like conditions, change, thought! Shouting such words in Sanskrit, they passed a resolution that accepting the change in conditions is baloney. This way we can see that rather than the Monkey conference there were more number of followers of Pucchwan in the Brahmin conference. 
But this Brahmin Conference’s resolution gave a huge blow to the Darwin’s Law of Evolution. Those communities and people who change with the changing conditions and adapt to it, accordingly those are developed. Hence Darwin and such, through the Theory of Evolution had proved the evolution of man from the monkey. But from the fresh news of the Monkey 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
and Brahmin Conferences held in Varanasi, it was naturally clear to these progressive thinkers that this is an exception to the theory that Man is a developed stage of the Monkey. Because monkeys were ready to adapt to the change in conditions but humans do not do so and remain animals. We are forced to believe that at least the Brahmins gathered at the Unproductive convention in Varanasi are not the developed monkeys but just monkeys and the monkeys gathered in monkey conference are the developed stage of the Pandits. 
- 19 January 1929. 
(16) The Mumbai Riots 
It Happened! Finally the Mumbai Riot happened. It raged to its peak, and cooled down. It went through all the three stages from origin and rhythm, which any substance has to go through. After it cooled down now all that is left is the divine last rites of it. Now the corpse of the riot has to be placed on the funeral pyre and all we can do now is waiting and seeing how much wood, it needs until it completely reduces to ashes; and also how much good is burned with the bad in the process. 
The Mumbai riots are over, but what is this? There are still a lot of Hindus alive in Mumbai! Actually one can actually count how many died with ease – all others are alive! Not like the old days where you would lose count of the number of people dead a lot of them are alive! It’s a miracle! 
Since the organisation started and especially after the Nehru report, the Muslim Paigambers have been predicting the nearing of the apocalypse for the Hindu world. The sizzling tongued Shaukat Ali said, ‘So the Hindus keep teasing me? They will soon learn a lesson. Oh Hindus, so you are approving the Nehru Report? War to the Knife! A fierce duel between daggers!’ Mohammed Ali said, ‘Which trees dead leaves are these Hindus? Muslim outlook said, if it comes to that we would bring in the Pathans and establish a Muslim kingdom the very chests of the Hindus!’ The Fatwas issued by the Mullahs and Maulavis have lost count. The dispute between then boiled down to one fact, one Muslim is equal to how many Hindus in a fight – how many Hindus can he kill – in this fierce duel of daggers!!’ Some said, one Muslim can kill 5 Hindus; some said 10; some said 50; some said 100! Based on these and other mathematician’s equations we came to a theory, that one Muslim would be tough on minimum 28.6 Hindus! That too, a Indian Muslim! The Pathans who would be brought in to establish the Muslim kingdom, for one such Pathan , 100 Hindus would not be sufficient for his Chatni. This was a sub- theory of the above theory. These predictions made in January in hundreds of Public and private meetings of the Muslims in Calcutta kept reaching our ears that there was no way to know when the catastrophe will befall the Hindu world! On that day The Hindu earth would stop revolving and stand trembling with fear. 
Suddenly news started pouring in, that the Pathans and the Hindus in Mumbai are at war! Shaukat Ali said, this fire will take the form of Hindu – Muslim Riots! And immediately that happened. Pathans , Sheikhs, Sayyad, Shias, Sunni all the Muslims united. It was an actually duel of daggers. The group of thousands and thousands of Muslims started killing the 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Hindus. Seeing the columns and columns of the Times being filled this way, the Hindus started losing hope, and wonder if the such renowned eagerly awaited apocalypse of the Hindu world! Has finally arrived!! The one Muslim who was basically tough for 28.6 Hindus; that Muslim was out in the street in thousands! – Now how will even one Hindu survive in Mumbai? No matter many how many ways we did the math the answer was the same. Now Mumbai will become Hindu-less! And to add to it the Pathans had arrived. Now once again the Muslim Empire will stand on the chest of the Hindus! Sighing and resigning to our fate, we stood at the gate of the hoping that our chests would be the first step to the Emperor’s throne! 
Suddenly we saw the Pathans everywhere on the street; but running for their lives, falling down, dying, and the group of Hindus running after them carrying any weapon they found at their hand! But then we thought, maybe it is a trick of the Pathans to initially fall and die in front of the Hindus and then get up and attack and finish them! Suddenly we heard someone shouting loudly like a fire engine, and wailing ‘Tauba Tauba,’ On investigation we found it was Shaukat Ali shouting, ‘My Pathans are getting killed, Hindus are hunting them. Government run, Police run, Muslims run! Tauba, Tauba!’ 
We thought, the Pathans, who were the only hope for establishing the Muslim Empire on the Hindu chests - These were very the Pathans; And Hindus were hunting them! This fire engine roaring, the duel of Daggers! was suddenly wailing! Is it really possible that the Hindus who closed the door of the buildings as soon as they saw a Pathan; were today hunting down the Pathans on the street! One Muslim is still equal to 28.6 Hindus! 
However, they hunted the Pathan is one thing. But the rightful objection of the Muslims is that, the Hindus who killed the Pathans did not consider them as Pathans but as Muslims; what answer do the Hindus have to this? This is an inexcusable mistake of the Hindus. While killing every Pathan as a religious torturer why did the Hindus not segregate the Muslimism from him and Kill just the Pathanism? But they are also Hindus only! The finished the whole Pathan. They would not leave the Muslimism outside the plate of the riots even for an offering! Of course the Muslims also entered the riot blowing the war horns for the much awaited duel of daggers. 
At least this should have opened the eyes of the Hindus. As per the age-old tradition when the Muslims raised the knife the Hindus should have according to their age – old tradition, at least to honour the ratio of 1:28.6, extended their necks for the Muslims to chop. The Pathans may be accused of gathering in huge numbers and rioting; but isn’t this our own fault? Once this Pathan workers riot turned into a Hindu-Muslim riot, when we saw one Muslim at least 28.6 Hindus would have presented their necks, then why would have the Muslims gathered in such high numbers? When hundreds of Muslims made a just demand, “Oh friend, I want cut your neck” if some of the Hindus were seen throwing stones at them, then the Muslim religious feeling of 28.6 was hurt and then what is the surprise if they start burning around things? What injustice? 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
They did not stop at that. Now-a-days the Hindus are haunted by the ghost of the organisation! That is why when the Muslins gathered in a crowd those idiots attacked them. Thanks God, at least the Peace committee carrying the impartial flag went about shouting slogans of ‘Hindu-Muslim unity’ while the flowed the stream of Hindu Massacre! This Friday night’s Hindu –Muslimki Jay’ and the Malabar Night’s “Swaraj Ki Jay” these two slogans will be embellished in our history! Unfortunately there was only one peace committee in Mumbai, - hence only on one Friday night resonated with the slogan “Hindu-Muslim ki Jay” and showed us the National Unity, if at least five to ten more Peace committees established, then at least the Hindus would have become quiet! Means completely quiet! Totally quiet like in a cemetery!! And then from that “Hindu – Muslim ki Jay” the word Hindu would be cut off by the drawn weapons and Then only “Muslim ki Jay” would have remained. And then at least the Peace experts of the peace committees and the warfare experts of the Khilafat committee who want to establish Pure Muslim Empire would have fulfilled their wishes at least in Mumbai. 
But this organisation has tar faced the Nationalism. Our national brothers hence telling the Muslims instead, we Hindus are also your brothers – so you only be happy to get your necks cut off by out daggers without uttering a single word! And the Hindus attacked the Mosques, started stabbing the Muslims on the streets and made some areas free from Muslims, Looted Hundreds of Muslim rupees, blasted the east bound trams and as soon as they saw a Pathan they would take him to a side and beat him up! They are only Hindus! They go with the flow. Four – five years ago they kept on dying, now they are killing then they would keep on killing. 
What to do, it is the misfortune of the Hindu Muslim unity! What else? At the time of the revolt of the Mopla’s the national leadership was in the Khilafat supporting Mahatma Gandhi. If that was in the case in Mumbai today, then just like during the Chaos of the Aurangzeb followers one or two Hindus were raped and converted to Muslim similarly in Mumbai one or two Hindus would have died somewhere and for the sin committed by the Hindus, a National fast could be observed and their soul could have been easily purified! 
But out of “revenge” this feeling of organisation entered into the Hindu minds. This destroyed the poor peace committee! The intention was so noble! But two three Muslims were killed by the Hindus, one Pathan also hit back with his baton but it hit poor Mr.Nariman! 
What about the Muslims murdering the Hindus, looting them? Someone may ask such a Anti- National question, but he should not forget that that is a Muslim tradition. That is the very religion of the Muslim terrorist gentlemen. That bitterness in them should be applauded by the Hindus saying “My Brave Mohammedian brothers”, or attack our Hindu –Muslim unity in the name of ‘revenge’? 
But this organisation ruined everything. The Patriot freedom fighters ‘Mohammed Ali’ and his right hand Shaukat Ali with their broken hearts left Mumbai for Delhi. Hundreds of brave men turned their backs on the Hindus and taking an oath that they do not want to see their 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
faces again. Ali set out on the road to Delhi , while is warfare expert head was still on his shoulders. Hundreds of Muslim dead bodies and wailing wounded littered around the streets; but he still did not stop. It was good that he only felt rested when he finally reached Delhi. He only had protected the lives of his disciples till their death. Does anyone die for someone else, and stay stuck on it? 
The Governor however, performed his duties very aptly; after the riots he visited the places of the riots with all the entourage. If there was coward Governor, he would have gone there while the riots were on and proved his ignorance! If the Governor would have visited these places after another year of the riots, this pilgrimage would have looked even more celebrated! 
Along with that the governor sent a letter of condolence for the death of Mr. Priestley with his family. Thousands of people who died in the riots and their families are missing! The fools who don’t have a house or shelter writing letters of condolence to them was impossible. 
In such a way, though the brave Muslim was equal to 28.6 Hindus and thousands of such brave men’s army shouting ‘Din Din’ entered into the riots, but even then the Hindus in Mumbai were still alive! Thousands let the city that is true; but in those rogues, there may be many who do not feel the need to be present, for the post riots arrests. 
Due to the boycott, not a lot of people are appearing in front of the Simon Commission for witness testimony, but the riot may appear. If the British police are not there then how will you rule ? Let us not ask this question to Simon now. Because this riot has already answered it. In a lot of places at Mumbai, there was not a single well – equipped Police station. Even if we didn’t see the British Government for a day or two for any useful work, even then the Hindus survived - shouting slogans through the entire buildings they survived! The killed and killed and survived! Similarly the y will survive in India also! 
The Government should however, take one thing into consideration. If these riots become a daily affair, if the Guard, Motors, machineguns, armours, gun fights start every morning, like the milkman delivers milk, then the common man will lose the fear for these horrible ghosts of the Riots and they would not step back from laying their hand on the head of the very ghost who started this riot! No one need to teach the British Government the historic fact that, such riots are the origins of a revolt. But your devoted slave could not hold back his feelings; so he suggested it, Our Lord and Master will definitely take appropriate actions against it! 
- Date 23 February 1929 (17) Nepal’s Stone Palace and Sayyad Ahmed’s Glass House 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Can anyone tell us the current whereabouts of that some Sayyad Ahmed, who himself lived in a Glass house and still dared to throw stones at the Strong Stone Palace of Nepal? Some days ago, in the ‘Shraddhanand’ did he not prove that in comparison to Afghanistan Nepal is a very poor country? That Sayyad Ahmed Khan! Can anyone tell where he is now a days? We want to give him and extremely good news. 
We posted a letter on the address of his Glass house, from which he would throw stones at others; but the Dead letter office not only sent us the letter back, but also sent along important note saying, henceforth, ‘think before you write the names of the above mentioned person. Last time there was a name of some ‘ Digamber Bhat Mahar’ on a letter, and we did not give much attention to that mistake, but when this other letter arrived with the name ‘Sayyad Ahmed Khan’ we could not ignore it. If such mistake is repeated it would be very difficult for the Post Office to ignore such mistakes. If a Khan is named Sayyad; it is like calling the Brahmin, untouchable. Please do not repeat such a mistake or we will charge you a double fine.’ 
After receiving such a reprimand from the post-office, we checked our Shraddhanand again, but the name was correct, ‘Sayyad Ahmed Khan’! But we did not dare to write to the post office again, so are trying to locate him through public communication in Shraddhanad itself, asking if anyone knows his whereabouts. At least please convey this extremely good news to him directly. 
That, all the proofs that he had presented to show that Afghanistan is a greater country than Nepal, at that time some Hindus found them bitter and false, but after your letter being published in Shraddhanand, the way Afghanistan has flourished, even its enemies have to bow their heads and accept the proofs of Sayyad Khan. Really Afghanistan is a very developing, very strong, and extremely decent country; who can doubt this anymore? 
Sayyad Khan had written, ‘Where does that useless, wild, uncivilised Nepal stand! Did you not see just recently how the Amir was praised? The means of communication are improving rapidly in Afghanistan. The traffic is flowing smoothly. The Amir is bringing in revolutionary improvements. The rule of Afghanistan is so progressive and strong, as against Nepal’s useless rule. Afghanistan will capture Baluchistan. From the other side will take Tibet. Afghanistan has the support of Iran, Turkey, Russia Egypt,etc countries. The way the Muslim countries have united, where do you have such unity? See the awe of Amir Amanullah! When Sayyad Khan brought the true picture of Afghanistan before us, a lot of people shrunk their noses and said, “Yes, yes, let’s wait and watch, when a stray dog initially runs after a car trying to match its speed with excitement that his friends begin to think that he will defeat the car! 
All the teasing of Sayyad Khan by the Hindus has reverted on them. All the proofs, to all that Sayyad Khan said followed his words. Now the Hindus have no place to show their faces. 
First let’s look at the Amir! Sayyad said, “What an Awe of the Amir, what Valour! See how that was true to the word! See how the destitute, rogues, beggars, fakirs, water men’s kids, 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
gangs of thieves, the cheapest of mullahs, everyone is trying to reduce the load of the crown of the Amir from his head by snatching at it and thinking of giving him a rest! What an awe of the Amir! And don’t even ask about this bravery, if it was some other coward, would have come to know that some arrogant idiot like Baccha Saku is trying to attack Afghanistan he would have gone to the border and laid down his life trying to fight the invasion; but the Amir while running away alive showed no cowardice. As great is his valour so is his National Security! When a water man, became strong enough to attack Kabul, the cruel Amir Amanullah did not try and investigate it before. When the investigation was done, he did not bother to take adequate measure to counteract it. And when the water man attacked Kabul, claiming that a royal blood like him fighting against a low life like that is a blemish to his royalty, without firing a single gunshot he ran away , no left for Kandahar, leaving behind his five generation long ancestral kingdom and the crown as is. How to fight with water – men? Amanullah has not been tarnish by such a fight ever. The brave Amanullah, lost his kingdom in 24 hours, left the city in 4 hours, in 4 minutes gave the kingship to his brother, in another 4 minutes he took it back and for more than 4 months is now hiding behind the walls of Kandahar. The water man now already presiding over the Amir throne; the princesses in Amanullah’s harem are being distributed amongst the thieving children. The rogues are lying in the path of Amanullah’s bedroom. Everywhere, in every region Amanullah’s officers are wondering who the Amir is. Bhisti, Amanullah or we ourselves! They are sending offending letters against the orders of the Amir Amanullah! What an awe of Amanullah! What Valour!! 
Sayyad Khan said, ‘There are revolutionary improvements being made in Afghanistan’. Very true; should you grow a beard or shave it, if you grow then how long, how many fingers long, how many hands long; Should you wear a cap or turban ? if a cap then what type it should be? Round or standing, diagonally or with a tassel! The improvements are solving all these complex questions- and for those a blood shedding revolt! Baccha Saku has asked not only the girls but also the boys to wear a veil, close down the schools, as soon as you see a Mullah on the road you should lay on the ground in obeisance. Princesses should vengefully be married to thieves and vagabonds and held captive in their harems, if you see a Sikh or non – Sikh Hindu, loot him, and kill him as a infidel, Any book other than Quran should not be possessed, read. Everyone should read and follow the Quran, just as Baccha Saku reads and follows every word in the Quran! Improvement upon improvement! True revolutionary improvements! And that to following the age –old traditions of the Pathans that were followed when Afghanistan was known as the Bogy place! Look at Commander Nadir Khan! He lived abroad for five years, but still opines that the women should wear a veil! ‘Radical improvement’, what else? 
Sayyad Khan says, ‘Nepal’s rule is so useless. Afghanistan’s National Unity, rule is so progressive and strong!’ Now who can deny that? Nepal still has one Minister, One Capital. Just look at Afghanistan! Five Amirs! Fifty Capitals! Everyone is a Amir, or at least is a minister of an Amir. Every caste is throttling the throat of another! The Shinvars are stabbed with the daggers of Duranis, The Shias have the daggers of Sunnis in their chests! What else is national Unity? How else can you better describe it? Which other rule is better than that , that gives birth to one or two Amirs every second day? In the meagre area of Afghanistan, 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
thirty three gangs are fighting against each other, what better example of National strength you can show! 
‘Nepal is uncivilised’! Very true! Where are the princesses dragged by the Water men and forcefully married off in Nepal? The way the Amanullah was cunningly killing the Ahmedias and Baccha Saku was killing the Sikhs and Hindus and now the Sunnis are killing the Shias, why no one is involved in such religious acts for the past hundreds of years in Nepal? There neither the Muslims are killed as Infidels nor are the Hindus killing the Shaiv Vaishnavas. See the unity of the Muslims! Amazing Unity! Incredible Unity! There Amanullah embraces Baccha; Baccha embraces Ahmed Khan, Shinvari with Duranis, Duranis with Khas Khelas! All in Unity! It meets everyone like friends in life and Death! 
Such a united Afghanistan would conquer Tibet on one side and Sindh on the other; this should be told to Mr Sayyad! At that time the brave Amanullah was the ruler of Afghanistan so Sayyad was content on Tibet, and Punjab victory. But now not only Amanullah, but his wife, his waterman, his brother, his valet, his commander all have stepped in the war field, all of them Amir. Now Afghanistan will not just go on conquering the nations to it left, right, in the front and behind it, but will also conquer the very burning core of the earth as well as attack the heaven in the sky. 
‘When Afghanistan will need the sea, it will attack India and conquer the land from Sindh to Kathewad and gain victory over the western sea!’ These words of Sayyad, not only reflect his ambition but the ambition of the whole of Afghan Empire. But it is not today that we received this news. We are hearing this since we were in our diapers. The Amir’s father, his father’s father, and his father, all of them came panting wishing that at least once they can take a dip in the India Ocean and laid down their lives, but they could not take that dip. Currently Afghanistan is drowning in the few rivers that the country has, let them first cross those rivers, and if they are still alive then let them come to take a handful of water from the Indian Ocean. The Indian Ocean is also awaiting them, not to fulfil their wish of a dip in the sea but to take them into its depths and never to let them free. 
“The Communication and Transport of Afghanistan is smooth,” who is denying that? One traveller has to just take about hundred soldiers for security, and for every mile he has to face about 101 live threatening dangers and after that if he survives then yes he can travel another mile! But the final proof of Afghanistan’s’ strength according to Shaukat Alikhan, Sayyad Khan, and Ahmed Ali Khan etc., Khilafat experts is the support of the entire Muslim world that Amanullah had. ‘Iran, Turkey, Egypt, and Arab all these Muslim countries support Amanullah’, Yes of course! He had that support that is why as soon as Baccha Saku and his 25 men entered Kabul to attack Amanullah’ s throne, Amanullah went away to Kandahar! Amanullah had just returned home from Europe, Turkey, and Iran at that time. In the meantime, The Russian Csar also allowed this Afghan fly to sit on its shoulder – hence it is Ok that Sayyad claimed that Russia is supporting Amanullah. We also claim that Russia is behind Afghanistan – not in support – but just like a hunter is behind is prey deer. Why only Russia, does England not support Afghanistan? If not to Amanullah then to Baccha Saku – But some Afghan has England’s support! The Khilafat supporters’ description of the Pan – 
www.savarkarsmarak.com Islamic Unity was really very strong! When they saw Amanullah see how Kemal Pasha immediately sent for – five Turkish men to Kabul! And even before reaching Kabul, how those Turks immediately returned to Kemal! 
Now for the benefit of Pan-Islam and out of love for it we would like to suggest the Khilafat expert – especially our Hindi Khilafat. And that is, they should not cast the evil greedy eye on anyone assuming him to be Khalifa. Whatever the reason may be, but as soon as they look at someone, the person is hexed or is jinxed. First it was the Turkish Khalifa, poor fellow was so happy, but as soon as these Hindi Khilafat people started helping him as a Khalifa, that spelled doom for the poor man. He lost his Khilafat. He was moving around begging now. Then they suddenly saw Kemal. But Kemal did an incredible thing. He not only scattered away the Khilafa but also the Khilafat. In the meanwhile, when they went to appoint the Nizam as the Khalifa, he was extremely baffled. This Hyderabad’s balloon filled with the Khilafat air, burst as soon as he landed in the Governors’ hand. What resolution, what Independence, stupidity! The power would not even work on the European Chefs. Then He handed over his Khilafat greed to Amir Amanullah! Before Amanullah could get used to the Khalifa crown, these Indian Khilafat supporters jinxed the crown and Amanullah’s Amir Dom drowned in the bowl of holy water! Hence, hoping no one else will be jinxed by this hexed title, we are warning our Khilafat friends! Because we recently heard that Mohammed Ali has started talking to Baccha Saku on a golden telephone. That is why this request, that at least now don’t show the carrot of the Khalifa title to Baccha Saku and jinx his happiness! Let him lead a comfortable life in his palace for at least some days. Then when his end comes closer, he himself will feel the desire to become the Pan- Islamic Khalifa! 
Now it’s time to bid adieu to Sayyad Khan. But not in the poor, wild, uncivilised and un- united Nepali language but in the words of Afghansitan’s revered poet Shaikh Hajrat Sheikh Sadi. Sadi Says, Farsi Sadiya! Aaj roje ajalhusn ba turkey dadand Alko danayi fayeem ba una dadand Najo ajaj krishma hama dar aalam Hind Bevakuf va jahalat khas afghana dadand 
Meaning: ‘Hey Saadi! When the world was formed, Beauty was given to the Turks; Wisdom and Knowledge was given to the Greeks; Softness, Sweetness, Expressions and Decency fell into India’s share; and Vagabondism, Stupidity, and Monstrosity was given to Afghanistan!’ Goodbye Sayyad Khan, We take your leave. 
- Date. 30th. March, 1939 
(18) Martyr Rajpal and Mahatma Gandhi 
Last time in the Parliament session, during the interesting debate that took place on whether or not to give India ‘Dominion Status’, a serious news broke out, that may be English or 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
India by heart, but any person who has a heart would feel sympathetic about it. In the debate, a main leader and a chief conspirator of the world, Mr. Baldwin said, ‘In front of your and our eyes, India will never get Dominion Status!’ What sad news is that?’ 
Shame! Shame! Mr. Baldwin and those Parliament members to whom these words were addressed to, ‘India will not get Independence, as long as you and we are alive.’ Those English members, they are all going to die so soon! Will Mr. Baldwin leave all of us and pass away within a year! Shame! Shame! 
Because Bhagat Singh has already declared in the Lahore court that Dominion Status will be gained within a year Not only that, he also recommended that as we all are going to be free at that time the court should not waste time on the trial and rather rest their bones. Hence, this revolutionary prediction would be fulfilled within a year; and there Baldwin was promising just the opposite, is not an irresponsible person! Of course! Within a year a Mr. Baldwin and the members of Parliament present that day are going to shut their eyes for good is for sure! Shame! Shame! What a sad incident! 
India devotee, Bhagat Singh says, within a year we will gain our Independence! Britain devotee, Baldwin says, in front of my eyes, you will never get your Independence. We do not want both their oaths to be false – 
As both these gentlemen were great patriots of their respective countries. If either of them is proven false, you and we, the ones who would like to live within the British Empire and want to live peacefully within it do not wish that the Hindi – English citizens’ united honour would be hurt. The only way that these two oaths do not falter is that the British loyalist Mr. Baldwin will close his eyes permanently in the first half of the next year and let the next half prepare India to receive the Dominion Status. However, a leader like Mr. Baldwin would depart from our midst so soon and to hear the news from his own mouth gives us extreme grief. This sad day will befall the British Parliament: The danger at the time of Guy Fawkes was also not so horrible! The Indian freedom will be achieved within a year; and at the same time, in the Parliament, the life line of the young and old great members was suddenly shortening! Shame! Shame! As the God wills! What else! 
There in Birkenhead this incident will happen, but here the murderer of Dharmveer Rajpal, Ila Medina had to face a horrible incidence! The man who murdered the Hindu Dharmveer Rajpal, a Muslim named Ghazi Illamuddin – despite trying everything to save his own life was hanged to death! And this way the Rangila Rasol case was truly buried! While burying the Muslim dead bodies, not Hindus! 
Now after this has been buried, if we try to review this case, just by sifting through the soil a bit, we can see that at least for the Muslims this was an expensive deal. Because for one Hindu, how many men did the Muslims lose, The first Ghazi, who attacked Rajpal , was sentenced to seven years in prison, the second Ghazi who attacked Rajpal , was sentenced to fourteen years in prison. And this Ghazi Illamuddin was dragged to the gallows and hanged. So behind one Hindu three Muslims were dead or are half dead! On top of that for 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
their rites again an expense at the Privy Council went to three to four Lakhs! If the Muslims are still interested to buy this enmity at this expensive rate, then they are welcome. If every Muslim becomes Ghazi Illamuddin, There total number is 7 crores. If one Hindu Rajpal requires 3 Muslims then maximum loss of Hindus is 3 crores, even if the whole families of the Ghazi’s attack the Hindus, 19crore Hindus remain, and Muslims? Zero! 
Keeping this equation in mind, if the Muslims still have the guts to continue their Hooliganism then they should go ahead! Their belief that, by killing Rajpal they will suppress the Hindus, will lead to their own doom. This is clear from this incidence. Hindus, in the past used to be suppress by hooliganism, but this is the era of Organisation, Now you may continue your hooliganism till the time you want to and we will retaliate till you get tired of it!. 
Actually, Rajpal wrote Rangila Rasool, in protest of the Muslim Slogan, ‘Kisan teri Gita jalani padegi’ meaning Lord Krishna you will have to burn your Gita. Since the book contained a lot of details about the History of Mohammed the Court had released Rajpal. If the Muslims wanted they could have written another book that would have falsified the comments in Rajpal’s book. Idiom would have fought Idiom. But no! Where do the Muslims know any Idioms? They immediately resorted to their monstrous violence which had worked at times. But that was in the past. Rajpal boldly continued his Arya samaj propaganda. When he died he took three Muslims along with him and proved that this deal was more expensive for the Muslims than for Hindus. He supported the Hindus, that is why he died. Other than that the Hindus started praising him as Dharamveer (Religious Hero) Rajpal and finally the two lakh Muslims had to shed their tears when they saying,’Hai Tauba!’ and took out Ghazi Illamuddin’s funeral procession. This actually buried the Rangeela Rasool Case!! 
The Muslim who said ‘Kisan teri Gita jalani padegi’ and started this fight, his sins were repaid by Ghazi Illamuddin’s death at the gallows and two lakh Muslims had to bury him shouting and howling. 
The Patwardhans’ deal at Alibagh may not have been as expensive as the Rajpal deal for the Muslims, but it sure was not cheap for them too. A Pathan stabbed Patwardhan with his dagger, but then the Pathan died hanging at the gallows. Finally one for one – eye for an eye – tooth for a tooth – neck for a neck – life for a life, we do not mind continue this if the Muslims have the guts to do so on the above condition! Even if we subtract 7 crore Hindus against their 7 crores, even then 15 crores remain!! That too Hindus!! 
Some gentleman may ask, for how long is this eye for eye and tooth for tooth going to continue? We will tell him,” Oh innocent soul, till the time some idiot has a itch, and would keep scratching till he draws blood and is finally covered in blood and is tired of scratching! That you ask him! If he is still not satisfied? Then this is a good game. What is the use of us saying no? If he himself comes ahead to attack, then what is the use of crying later? Until at least one of the two loses both his eyes and all thirty two teeth, this game will continue, then instead of uprooting our own teeth and stopping this game, why not uproot his and end it, at least there will be no more injustice! Hence we will guarantee one thing and say, Henceforth 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
the Hindus will not say ‘Let it go’. Unless this hooliganism if not completely finished at least till it lays still , anyone who has the guts to fight can come up and we will teach him a lesson! The witness to our oath is Rajpal’s funeral pyre! Dindayal Patwardhan’s death is a witness! As both these deals were not expensive for Hindus – and cheap for Muslims, hence any other Muslim poet who has the guts should go ahead and write ‘Kisan teri Gita jalani padegi’ and we will show you a replay of this drama and again send some Ghazi Illamuddin to the gallows; We have no objection. If it suits you; you may continue to enjoy this Ghaziism till the end of your lives. 
Oh; But while the two lakh Muslim Ghazis were making a Martyr out of Illamuddin, how has all that noise not cracked out Mahatma Gandhi’s meditative pose even a bit? If it is unbreakable, then when Rajpal’s body was taken out in a procession and people were shouting “ Dharamveer (Religious Hero) Rajpal ki Jay” this memorial came out lashing and like the bellows of the blacksmith forged ahead to bite the procession like a snake. Rajpal’s body was not being released, but the Hindu’s undeterred by the lathicharge of the Police got hold of the body. The whole of the Hindu Lahore was showering flowers on Rajpal’s body and shouting “Rajpal ki Jay” , the Muslims imitated the same and called Illamuddin ‘Ghazi’. Out of these both shouts, actually Illamuddin was a murderer and he had actually stabbed and killed, seeing this any non-violent person should have felt disgust towards this procession; but no. Mahatma Gandhi did not feel any disgust towards it. He did not accuse the Muslims of anything or write a single word against them other than calling him a Ghazi; but when Rajpal was given the title Dharamveer (Religious Hero) , his meditation and peace was shattered so much so that he could angrily abuse the Hindus. 
He said, The readers of Maharashtra may not know this but I will tell you a story that may hurt the Hindus of Punjab – Gandhiji Angrily said, Rajpal is just a bookseller. He printed a book that would hurt the Muslim Mentality. That is why he was killed, what great religious bravery did he show in that? The books he had printed were all sold out, that means he suffered no loss, then what selfless act did he do? 
What Mahatma Gandhi actually meant in short is, ‘Rajpal printed the book as a part of his business, for the sake of earning he sold the book for money, and he died earning his livelihood, so where is the religious bravery in it? It is sheer stupidity of the Hindus that they have proclaimed him Martyr.’ 
“ As Rajpal’s book was being sold, even if he was dying for his religion, you should not call him a Martyr. Then when all of Gandhiji’s books are sold and especially the ‘Young India” is running on subscriptions then why should we call him Mahatma?” The shameless comment of Rajpal died due to his Business, tomorrow will go ahead and say that Tilak also was imprisoned, punished due to his business – of Kesari Newspaper-then why call him Lokmanya? 
‘Rajpal was killed due to his business’. Fine agreed, but did he commit the murder? Then why this great devotee of justice and non-violence who got angry when Rajpal was called Dharamverr because he was doing his business, did not utter a single word against the 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Muslims when Illamuddin, who cowardly attacked and stabbed Rajpal, was called Ghazi? Probably, the Hindus being stabbed by the Muslims is not totally violent, as killing the Germans for the British was not violence. 
If Mr. Rajpal would have gone about just minding his business, then why would he have been a thorn in the eyes of the Muslims! He was a devoted servant of Arya Samaj. When the Muslims were defaming Lord Krishna, and as it became unbearable he published the book Rangeela Rasool, well aware of the dangers and consequences of the same. He was very pleased, when the Muslim eyes started burning with the dosage of the book. If he just wanted to do business, then he would have printed a book on the life of Shraddhanand’s murderer Abdulla and called him Brother Abdulla and sold the copies of it amongst the Millions of Muslims just like “Young India”. He could have also written a fictitious history stating that the incidences in the Tap Market and other places never took placed and not only received cash rewards from the Khilafat Committee but also the Sabarmati Ashram! 
At least our King of Bhopal was there! While the Hindu community was being tortured and living a life of stress in the state, so much so that their cries of help and agony were also heard by the “Karamveer’ a known Gandhi loving newspaper, and the Hindu language, Religion, and culture was being killed and Islam propagated and practice everywhere in the state, Mahatma Gandhi went to Bhopal and purposely said that, ‘The subjects of Bhopal is extremely satisfied and happy under the rule of the Nawab! The Nawab, whose recreational car was so huge that it had a bathroom, pan shop, bedroom in short, it was like a palace in itself and it had recently received the first prize for grandeur in Europe. ‘That Nawab’, Gandhi said, ‘has a simple lifestyle!’ And he is the closest you can get to have Lord Ram as a King! We say, if Rajpal just wanted to do business then he would have published a book “Bhopal’s King Ram and his bard Sabarmati’s Valmiki”, on the life of the Bhopal Nawab as described by Mahatma Gandhi. That way, the Bhopal Nawab would have wet Mr. Rajpal’s hand too just like Mahatma Gandhi; not only that the Muslims would then have also called Mr. Rajpal, “Mahatma”; and the Hindus would have done the same too. Because the one who cries out louder when a he sees the wounds of a oppressor, than when he sees the wounds of the oppressed; they call him an extremely kind person. The person who snatches the milk of an infant and feeds it to a baby of a snake, they call him noble. The person who walks on his head rather than his two feet they call him an ascetic. 
Mr. Rajpal did not give up his loyalty to the Hindu religion and his pride for the Hinduism though he was attack thrice for it and hence he was a true Dharamveer (Religious Hero). That is why the organization loyal Hindus showered him with flowers of gratitude and that is why Mahatma Gandhi thought it was wrong. As the organization’s huge agitation without paying any heed to Gandhi’s abuses was rapidly growing. He cannot bear to that, which is a fact. To avenge that when the Hindu organization praises someone as Dharamveer (Religious Hero), he immediately critics him, and the one who they criticize like the Hindu hater, the Nawab of Bhopal, he will praise them immensely. He does not receive any importance in the organization, hence he hates it. At the same time, if he joins hands with the organization, the knives and lathis will hang over his head, - this fear; that’s his dilemma what else? 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Good, that there is Ravana’s rule in Lanka now; or due to the hatred for the Organization, just like he purposely praised the Hindu hater Bhopal Nawab so much so that he would make the professional readers blush, he would have toured Lanka and praised Ravana also! Just like Bhopal he would have also said, that the subjects of Lanka are very satisfied under the Ravana rule – even Sita, held hostage in the Ashokvan! Ravan is also like King Ram! 
-Date. 30th. November, 1929. 
(19) The Instructions of Shankaracharya Maharaj and Sir John Bull 
All oppressors are of the same caste. All over the world all oppressors think alike and united. Then that oppressor may be a coat and hat wearing John Bull or a loincloth draped bald headed Headman of an Ashram or Pith. 
If anyone wants to see the proof of it, then he should see the very class-specific declaration published on behalf of the Sharada Pith’s Shankaracharya. To even touch the extreme classes is a sin, and with the good intention at heart to save the people from this unforgivable sin, this declaration was released by Parmahansa Priwrajkacharya etc, etc. As it was a new declaration we thought there might be something new written in it, hence started reading it. We started getting a feeling that we had read most of the sentences in it before. The thoughts were as if they were stolen from some other article. It was almost like dejavu. But since it was a declaration of the Pith, we could not dare say it was stolen from somewhere else. Assuming that some great personality with a mentality similar to the Sharda Pith’s ideology, of just for the sake being kind to the downtrodden and untouchables, oppressed them, would have previously written a similar declaration. And if the ideology is similar; similar words may be easily uttered as a natural trend and being influenced by it a similar copy has been published again. Therefore we started searching through the archives of our memories for where we had seen the old copy and where did we leave it. 
After some time we found that paper. We were very happy. Just like we thought, that also was a declaration of a great authoritative organization. Not only that, but the way this declaration of Sharada Pith was on behalf of ‘Shrimad Rajarajeshwar Maharaj’, similarly the old one was also from the a great person who decorated the same ‘Rajarajeshwar Maharaj’! The way we admired the Historic similarity in these two declarations, we hope our readers will also admire the same. Hence we are printing the salient features of both these declarations side by side. As the Sharada Pith declaration has already been recently published, readers can verify the authenticity of the passages tat we have published below. Only for the clarity of the meaning we have put certain sentences in brackets at some places. The rest of the declaration is verbatim. We have not even changed the Non-Hindu words in it, because maybe using slang words in the Hindu Shankaracharya’s writing is a part of the Sanatan Dharma! The other declaration that we have, is we believe the only copy we have, and is currently unavailable elsewhere. However, a lot of people will recall having read it somewhere, sometime, so its originality would be beyond doubt. This new declaration is published on behalf of Shankaracharya Maharaj for the extreme classes. It is an order for 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
all the Indian including the Shankaracharya too. The Shankaracharya of the Sharda pith calling on the Untouchables and cobblers as extreme classes orders them to stay within their limit and follow their own religion. Sir John Bull orders all the Indian including the Shankaracharya to follow the same extreme religion considering them as extremely untouchable. The two declarations are as follows: - 
Shankaracharya Maharaj’s order for religious Indian untouchable class: 
On behalf of Shrimad Parmahansa (as fair as a swan) Pariwrajakacharya Jagadguru ( teacher of the four directions) ShardaPitheshwar Shrimadrajrajeshwarashram Maharaj the untouchables are ordered with blessings, that – 
1. Since the past some days, some anti- religious people who have fallen prey to their greed, are going against nature and trying to wipe of the religious barrier within the classes and creating a round chaos within the communities. They have selfish and anti-religious intentions of touching the lower castes, and getting them to enter into the temples of the higher caste and their by molest the higher classes. You untouchables at least do not get caught in this storm of religious treason. 2. You untouchables are the subjects of India and a part of the Hindu Community. If you follow the main Indian religion (that is , the way a dog walks in the street touching us, you will not walk that way so close to us; you will not drink the water from the river where the buffaloes drink water, but instead go to the lower levels of the river to quench your thirst; you will not molest the tasty sweet lake water where the Muslims wash their kettles and the higher castes drink water; while the higher caste do all the profitable businesses you will limit your existence to the huts beyond the village cemetery etc, as per the sacred religion), that is the only way for you to uplift yourself and be blessed. 3. Have these religious traitors ever offered you food and clothing? (the way we donate torn and tattered shreds of cloth after and eclipse or used disposable plated on festive days as per our Sanatan Dharma (Eternal Religion). Have they done anything that would really be beneficial to you? ( Swami Shraddhanand, Lala Lajpatrai, Hindu organization, and their untouchables upliftment committees have given jobs and means of earning a livelihood to many of them is a lie) We higher caste people are ready to help you in what is actually beneficial for you. These anti religious leaders are your true enemies. If you get caught in their storm of lies you will have to bear the consequences like Munshiganj – Parvati. They will cause huge disputes. 4. Hence stay away from these anti- religious movements. Follow your untouchable religion, and God will shower his blessing on you and give you a birth in the higher caste in the next life. (perhaps, like that some Shankaracharya today may have been a cobbler in the last birth, - Similarly today’s untouchable in his next life may become a Shankaracharya by being born in the higher class. What is more a hopeful future than the one after the death? Hence until death, consider yourself lower than the dog and consider untouchability as your religion and be contented. 
Sir John Bull’s order for the Loyal Indian Subjects 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
On behalf of Shrimad Parmahansa (as fair as a swan) Pariwrajakacharya ( conquerors of the four directions) Angla Dweepeshwar ( rulers of the English isles) Shrimadrajrajeshwar ( King of kings including your Shankaracharya) Sir John Bull , our untouchable Indian subjects are hereby ordered with blessings, that – 
1. Since the past few days, some anti-national people who have fallen prey to their greed, ( for example Tilak, Lajpatrai, Chaphekar, Savarkar, Aurobind, Gandhi, Gokhale etc people who have failed to acquire high jobs and are unhappy because of that ) ‘Navishnu: Pruthvipati:’ means ‘We fair- skinned British are rulers of the Earth and as the kings of you black people are as sacred and divine as Vishnu’ are going against nature and trying to wipe of the King- Subjects barrier and creating an all-round chaos within the country. They have selfish and anti-national intentions in breaking the system, of you black people as subjects being servants and we English being rulers being Kings, by demanding equal rights for the black people as the white, and getting them to enter into the palaces and thereby commit treason. You black Indians at least do not get caught in this storm of national treason. 2. You Indian people are our subjects and a part of the British Empire. Just like the Sanatan Dharma has a caste bar, the main religion of the Empire is the colour bar. You Indian black people are servants, subjects and we Fair British people are masters, lords this is a caste bar. (That is when we are in the First class you will not sit next to us in that compartment, If you see a British officer in the street you will salute him immediately, if a senior British officer gets angry , you will accept his kicks as offerings. We will have posts with power like Governor, etc and you will be pencil pushers, clerks, peons and Cooks; While we dwell in offices and cities you will limit yourselves to the coloured area, you will not walk alongside us in schools , tramways and roads,- you will not molest the Bruisers roads, We are your riders and you are our donkeys: This natures rule about the king – and Subjects should be happily followed), that is the only way for you to uplift yourself and be blessed. 3. Have these national traitors, up lifters of India, ever offered you food and clothing? In order to expose their evil plans and for your benefit we create famines every other year at various places, you black people die for the want of food, while we Bruisers draw our salaries in lakhs send it home (the intention being, to verify that whether or not these traitors give you food and clothing or not) What is really beneficial to you ( for example – Pay enormous amounts of tax without a word, Let the British carry all the gold available in India to England, Be the food for our cannons till our gun powder finishes) We white races are always ready to help you in such deeds. These Tilak etc anti-national leaders are your true enemies. If you get caught in their storm of lies you will have to bear the consequences like Jallianwala Bagh. They will cause huge disputes. 4. Hence stay away from these anti- national movements. Follow your religion servitude, assuming that the rulers are Lord Vishnu and God will shower his blessing on you and give you a birth in the white race in the next life. (perhaps, you may be born as a lord in the next birth and become a senior office in the British Empire – or may be born in the palace and become the King- What is more a hopeful future than the one of the 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
next birth? Hence aim at that, be content in carrying the weight of our huge salaries and follow the religion of the Subjects. 
- Date 14 December 1929 
(20) Chittagong‘s reply to Sir Tegarts’ blows 
Wherever you see there is Non-cooperation going on! Seeing this non-cooperation game of the Indians the British Government could not resist entering into it. Of all the players of this game in the British Empire, Calcutta’s Sir Charles Tegart was famous as the most capable and dynamic for a long-time. Hence, while this game of non-cooperation was reaching its peak, he was the first to jump in and as soon as he jumped in, he naturally superseded all the Government officers and non-government officers. 
Oh so Barrister Sengupta, Subhash Chandra Bose, and others just break the salt law? Sir Tegart said, wait, I will break the very rule book, The Indian Law , Indian Penal code itself! Saying this he stepped out and entered the first house he saw, the Saraswati printing press and pounced on its manager Mukherjee! Mukherjee asked, ‘but do you have a warrant?’ Sir Tegart replied, ‘Shut up! Warrant? Here is the warrant!!’ And the Commissioner of Calcutta Police himself hit his baton on Mukherjee’s head and said, ‘See this warrant!’ Henceforth this baton – warrant is how the system will work! 
Our great leader broke the salt law and here the commissioner of Police himself broke the very Indian Penal Code and criminal Procedure! The Government also joined Mahatma Gandhi’s agitation. Now there was no one to oppose the non- cooperation movement. Baton was a warrant! The way in the Hindu religion, thirty three crore Gods reside in one cow; similarly the thirty three crore rules of the British reside in one baton. Now we don’t need to memorize this act, this section and this code and that sub-section; it is enough to remember just one word- Baton! Baton itself is the rule, a law, a ethic and a Warrant! Baton: The English rule can be summarized in one word; but the word that was a kept secret like a key mantra of the British Government and because of which stupid people would keep searching the Indian penal code and get lost in it, it is good that Sir Tegart has for once and for all unveiled it- Baton! This one word is the Essence of the British rule. Baton, is the warrant of British existence, - and section too!!! 
Is it so? Then the revolutionaries of Chittagong said, ‘Baton, then baton’ rules and regulations, fear, traditions, all set aside when the British Government challenged, ‘Shut up! Baton is the warrant! The revolutionaries of Chittagong also patting their arms challenged – We won’t shut up! For your Baton this is our Baton! Only you have arms and we don’t! Till you were waving your paper warrants we also played along the tune of the rules and regulations. But now if you are saying this is the warrant and hitting on our heads with your batons, then we too will break the tune and start singing war songs and take our first kill!’ 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
And before anyone could know it the revolutionaries of Chittagong started on a killing spree movement! 
The men on the killing spree were just a handful, maximum a hundred over the tops. But the hundred men roaring murder, thundered and resonated aloud so much that the ovations of rule breaking processions spread across the miles did not achieve and intensified the political atmosphere. As these lion hearts threw the freedom salt from their hands and took the freedom pistols in their hands. They actually took life into their own hands. 
It was a Friday night. That took a ‘Good Friday’! It was a holiday for the British Officers and were celebrating it. Suddenly the darkness in the night stated glowing! The revolutionaries divided into three groups; one cut off the telephone lines and poured petrol and set fire. They disconnected the train lines between Dhaka and Calcutta and uprooted the railway tracks at a distance. They derailed a goods train and blocked the rail road. The second group attacked the Assam –Bengal railway Officers and smashed their heads with the pistol butts. Then the set the railway station of fire and snatched away the guns and ammunition. 
The third group attacked the reserve police camp. The British Sergeant and the other guards were all killed at one time and they entered the armoury, and carried away with them as many guns, ammunition, etc weapons that they could carry, and set fire to what every ammunition they couldn’t. 
After such terrible incidences the magistrate stated out for a tour of the places. But on the way they were ambushed. The revolutionaries blew up the vehicle and killed the driver and body guards. The magistrate saved himself with a lot of difficulty. 
In this way the group of 100 people, revolted, attacked and looted and went deep into the nearby mountains and escaped safely!! 
The Good Friday night turned out to be a bad one for the Chittagong British and The British Government. The Lion claws and teeth that are to be feared the revolutionaries attacked the very teeth and claws of the lion and uprooted them, then how was the lion’s tail going to scare them? The revolutionaries had looted the armouries. They killed the British by snatching their own weapons! His shoe on his head!! The baton that Sir Tegart had hot on Mukherjee’s head saying, ‘See this warrant!’ The revolutionaries of Chittagong had hit the same baton on his English brethren and said, ‘See this is Death!’ 
There were riots in the past month in Calcutta and Karachi. But they were riots. Thousands of people revolted against the immediate suppression of the British Government and started the beating. Even then the accurate attack on British and the shooting of specific Indian Leaders, that signified the non – cooperation stepping towards killing. But this Chittagong incident was not the same; it was a purposeful attack of the revolutionaries on the British government. It was a page torn from the 1857 revolt. It was not a riot; it was the first grunt of a mutiny. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com Because in the year 1857, each centre had the same agenda. Suddenly breaking the post, telegraph, rail lines and disconnect the communication, raid the British officers, immediate killing of the local officer, taking over the armouries and shouting slogans of revolutionary victory. This is the exact agenda followed on the clock at Chittagong. Though one thing was different – in 1857 the soldiers and police used to mingle secretly amongst the revolutionaries and as soon as there was mutiny they would openly join them. And one other main difference in that 1857 mutiny and the Chittagong incident was that, those mutineers attacked everywhere at the same time. Not one or two outbursts but a grand mutiny everywhere! Other than these two things, the Chittagong incident was a preplanned and aggressive local replica of the 1857 Mutiny. Perhaps, it was the warning of the coming storm. 
And therefore the Governor General, Governor, Collector, Magistrate, and what more even our Mahatma Gandhi also were startled, shocked and angered by the Chittagong’s revolutionary grunt! As it is, here lakhs and lakhs of people were enjoying the movement, processions, salt fists, police fun, news of strikes, today the police scratched this one, that freedom fighter was sentenced to two months, this revolutionary was sentenced for three days; Government and people both were engrossed in the agitation. But all that fun was spoiled by the handful hundred of Chittagong! Does anyone cheat and play a spoilt sport in the game of agitation? These revolutionaries simply cannot play a game. Suddenly total extremes! That is why the way the English gel with us, they don’t gel with them! 
And hence we sincerely request the British Government and people, that they should redress these angry and cheating people promptly. The fact that, this Chittagong incident is filled with such terrible meaning more than the much publicized Chauri chaura riots. The interest in it should be recognized in time. Especially The British Government should bring this to a close before the Chittagong incident is repeated everywhere. 
Gandhi has abused the Chittagong incidence and given an order that, the ones who don’t follow non- violence as a principle, should not join my movement, stay away. It is amazing that Gandhiji’s eyes have still not opened since the Chauri Chaura riot! Now at least he should understand that when a massive national storm is formed, no one can keep it bottled up in some “my rules” lane in Bardoli. 
Mahatmaji! This agitation that is going on, it is an echo of the grunt of the rising of an angry Nation. It is not my agitation, it is not your agitation; it is the catastrophic revolution of the angered mahakali due to India’s age after age suppression and accumulation of the sins and pious deeds, victory and losses, insults and acclaims, together with agony of crores and crores of people. It has a part of you, me and him. But it’s fate, destiny, averment and control is neither in ‘My’, ‘yours’ or ‘their’ hands but is dependent on the Mahakali’s extreme human wishes. Who are you to tell the revolutions to stay aside? This is everybody’s nation. They are more eager to break the bounds of the country than you are. You are trying to break the shackles with grass, we are trying to do the same with sticks, and they are trying with sledgehammers. Everyone has a right to fight and struggle to free the motherland by 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
breaking her shackles. Who can tell whom to stay away! Therefore assuming that this would happen, we all have united to face this revolution. Henceforth at least don’t give out such orders, and have such ridiculous expectations. 
For the same reason, previously in an edition “The revolutionary will keep quiet for three years” when a letter sent by some Colonel Bead, pleased some people, we sent them a warning! Not three years, but within three weeks the Calcutta riots took place. , then Karachi, and the Chittagong revolutionary attack is emphasizing the same not only for the Indians to hear but also the British, and that too so loud that even a deaf can hear it, that the revolutionaries are alive, and there is no sign of then going anywhere unless this revolution succeeds. Therefore it is only wise that the British and we can mutually bring about a revolution – it is still possible. There after it’s destiny’s call! 
But whatever the future holds and even if England send out Independence in a parcel today itself, no one can claim that we got our Independence in a bloodless and non-violent manner. As for the past twenty years at least there has been bloodshed and weapon use going on – And Sir Tegart’s baton and the Chittagong revolutionaries’ reply is the most up to date news of its existence! 
-Date 3rd May, 1930. 
(21) This curse of Revenge or this curse of assassination 
It is well- known the whole would suspects that the Assistant Superintendent of Police of Lahore was shot dead by someone as a revenge of Lala Lajpatrai’s murder. The inhuman beating that Lalaji was put to during a protest march against the Simon commission, Sanders was present at that time and as published by some newspapers he had a hand in that riot. 
Lalaji himself was unarmed not even carrying his usual cane; and he also had himself snatched away the canes from other people in the march who were carrying theirs. And with such an unarmed community he faced the baton laden, gun toting and bayonet carrying police, because he wanted it to fit tight in the definition of a non-violent protest. It did fit perfectly and when and unarmed meets and armed and the logically expected result was also seen. The baton crushed the chest in the very first swing; the procession was dispersed, Lalaji was injured; the Government patted the Police backs, our backs were inhumanly whipped. 
Then Lalaji suddenly died. People said, Lalaji succumbed to the beating by the lathis. The Government said, No; and even if so, then while controlling a crowd trying to break the peace and law if such a thing happens, it is not our fault. People took out a huge funeral procession of Lalaji’s body. People mourned for Lalaji. But the Government did not see any reason to mourn. People closed their shops and doors in bereavement. The Government offices as usually watched the funeral procession with opened eyes. They watched the mourning and strike with amusement. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Then one bright sunny morning, a senior officer Sanders, who showered blows on Lalaji with his baton stepped out of his office. He thought of sitting on a cycle. He sat on a cycle. An then someone else thought of firing a pistol. He fired the bullets and Sanders immediately fell down lifeless with a thud. 
After some days of the lathi charge Lalaji passed away. Hence it was natural that the government suspected that he didn’t die of the lathi charge. But as soon as Mr. Sanders was shot he died, so there was no doubt that he died of gunshot, hence the government immediately grieved. At such a time any man with a heart would feel grief, and the Government has a heart. 
When Lalaji died the people, people took out a funeral procession; but when Sanders dies it was now the turn of the government to take out a funeral procession. When Lalaji died people closed their doors and shops in bereavement, but with Sanders death it was now the turn of the Government to grieve with their offices closed. Lalaji was a leader of Punjab, but the Governor did not see the need to be present at his funeral in mourning. But for Sanders funeral all the officers including the Governor were present. If the people have to mourn for Lalaji , the government had to mourn for Mr. Sanders. Actually , the Government is a public organization, it should have been equally grieved for Lalaji and Sanders. Where for Lalaji’s funeral lakhs of people were present, the government did not feel the need to give him the Last Post round of fire by wasting the gun powder bought by public money, but for Sanders at whose funeral hardly two thousand people were present, he was given a Last Post along with the army honour. 
That only satisfactory thing was that the peoples’ leaders performed their duties well. They condemned the echo of the injustice done to Lalaji. They unlike the Government impartially mourned for Lalaji as well as Sanders. 
And if the Pandit’s wisdom can impartially mourn, the more incredible grief if not expressed by the Mahatma , the what is the difference in the Mahatma’s wisdom! 
Hence, the grief you and we felt for Mr. Sanders death, Mahatma Gandhi felt hundred tome s more grief as expected and so it happened! The poor Mahatma’s soul cringed in agony with this bad news. He wrote a article in ‘Young India’ titled ‘This curse of Revenge or this curse of assassination’. In that he tried to express the extreme grief that he felt as much as possible. There must be still a lot left in his stomach, enough to make him feel nauseous. His English words should not be translated wrongly in all the languages so we double translated it. If anyone wants to understand the intensity of the grief that Mahatma Gandhi felt for the death of Mr. Sanders, it can be seen through one thing, the even after the murder of Swami Shraddhanand, he did not express his anger about the curse of assassination through any article. Six people were killed; his body was beaten up and trampled upon like an animal. But Gandhiji’s single scream of impartiality was not heard by anyone. He even digested the Malbar massacre with detached impartiality. He did not let even a single tear wet the pages 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
of ‘Young India’. But as soon as he heard of Sanders death, he lost control over his detached façade and he almost drowned in his own tears. Such a cruel act it was! What to say!! 
This grief however, shed light of things that went unnoticed by others in this shameful act. Something that no one realized, was mentioned by Mahatmaji, in the very first sentence of his article, that was a dastardly act, is it? Did anyone realize it before? The Hindu Newspapers were after all Hindu. But even the Muslim newspapers, who are experienced in writing about such bad acts of bravery, were shell shocked by seeing the valour of this act. And above all even the English newspapers could not help praise the young man who did this act of extreme and tough, unshaken bravado, as he walked away with his hand s in his pockets while a chaos ensued in following the murderer. Some of us called this act as shameless, some called it condemnable, some called it aggressive – but there was not a morsel of bravery, patience, in it and not only that but it was a act of cowardice and the one who did this was an extremely coward person, even the English Newspapers did not realize this! But how did Gandhiji recognize it, ‘Dastardly’! What else! 
Some may say that what Gandhi considers as an act of injustice he feels it cannot have any patience in it. Injustice can have two sides Impatience and patience as Gandhiji does not understand this he called it an act of cowardice and the British who are in daily touch with patience, bravery and valour immediately recognized it. But to believe that Gandhiji does not understand how to recognize bravery would be like insulting him. Because in Malbar when the Moplas attacked the innocent people and torture them in the name of religion and rioted, their bravery and valour distracted Gandhiji enough to lose sight of the injustice and praise the Moplas in the ‘Young India’ saying, ‘My brave Mopla brothers’! Hence Gandhiji understand very well whom to call brave. But even then he calls the Moplas brave. That means the cruel Moplas are brave and this Dastardly! What else! 
We cannot even say that angered by the injustice Gandhiji wrote something. Because when the Shraddhanand’s murder angered the whole Hindu community this Hindu Mahatma kept his cool and called the killer ‘Brother Abdul Rashid!’and told the Hindus that, ‘insist on cancelling his hanging!’ After Hindu Shraddhanand’s murder also this man could be detached and when the English Sanders died whatever he said, must be after a lot of thought. Dastardly! What else! 
And, it does not seem like some assistant editor wrote this for him. Because, no one other that his can be so verbally self contradictory in his articles, as seen in this article too. Because while calling the act dastardly and coward, he further states, that the secret support that such acts receive is due to the unveiled courage that is present in this act! ‘As we have developed a liking for the reading the brave tales of Western dacoits, looters, Pirates, any such act we see without giving a thought about the motive behind it we state calling the person a brave warrior! This habit is not good! Gandhiji has given this as the principle reason behind the sympathy and support for the murder of Sanders in the people. Obviously, the gist of his article is that the Dastardly act had brave courage. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Isn’t it an excellent example of Self – contradiction! In an Act of cowardice one finds brave courage! Brave Courage is cowardice! Dastardly! What else! 
But if we have to say that, we are addicted to bravado, then the European Pirates, dacoits and Looters that Gandhiji has sited, none of their names seem to be on anyone’s lips; moreover there are even such men in the Indian Prisons, who have ten felonies each to their names, but even their photograph are not hanging on anyone’s walls! Also no one pats their back as soon as they see them! 
See this next news, on the third, a student of the Poona Law College named Kurlekar committed a suicide by jumping in front of a train near Bhambhurda. Now if just sacrificing life is bravado than this is also a brave act. But no one has written articles about this. Or no one wrote secret letter of praises for him. Then why only the bravery in Mr. Sanders murder attracts people? So says Gandhiji, not we! 
Because Gandhiji says, that Violence is in the air of this nation again! We do not feel that so much and today after eight years of the suffocation of non-violent slogans if there is really violence in the air, then it just proves that Gandhiji’s superiority is faltering. Isn’t it! 
No matter what the murders may say, they listen or don’t, but it is our duty, we who are calm, matured, tolerating, and patriotic people of this country to give them a few words of advice to bring them to their senses. If you don’t have the right to advise them then who has? Gandhiji seems to have the right to advise Shivaji, Pratap, and Lord Krishna too, as he keeps telling with his own mouth; and hence if not beneficial to the murderers but beneficial to all of us, he has mentioned one more thing in his article that the police officer actions were extremely harmless. The innocent police officer discharged his duty, however disagreeable its consequences may be for the community to which the assassin belongs. 
Now has everyone understood? The same comment had been made by the officer of the British Parliament. But the people did not like it at that time. Most of the newspapers also thought that at that time the police behave unjustly. Let’s not talk about the Killers, they would use Gandhiji’s words, ‘The officer discharged his duty, however disagreeable its consequences may be for the community to which the assassin belongs’ to their own benefit. But at least we the matured gentlemen should change our opinion about the police officer in Lahore. We should keep in mind the meaning of the article of Gandhiji. ‘Dastardly’! This one word says it all! 
However, one statement need to get a separate mention as it is extremely important. ‘What is the fault of the man? It is the fault of the system! Whatever the Assistant Superintendent did was done in obedience to instructions. No one person can be held wholly responsible for the assault and the aftermath. The fault is that of the Government system. What requires mending is not men but the system. What happened to Lalaji cannot be blamed on one person. The police superintendent was performing his duty. What is his fault? It is the fault of the Government system. You don’t need to improve the man , you need to improve the 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
system instead! DID you see how this rational thinking is so minute and even then so broad. And it was recalled also exactly in time. 
On the dot, because during the investigation of Odewire and Dyer, Gandhiji seemed to have forgotten this theory. The wax is soft, but they were punished and we are assuming that Odewire and Dyer, were normal humans. But it is not the fault of the man, but the system. , but the Mahatma forgot this important theory. . In fact Dyer was following the orders of his superiors, hence he is innocent. For obeying the orders of his superiors and hence should be declared innocent, but the superiors are at least Human? Hence it is not the fault of the man, but the fault of the system. This important theory was forgotten by the Mahatma at the right time. But he finally remembered it. Now everybody should know about this act ‘ Dastardly it is!’ what else! 
What’s the fault of the man? Improve the system! In a way, it is good that Gandhiji remembered this suddenly today, otherwise he would have sent an ultimatum at the time of Gopinath Saha , saying ‘Oh Governor! What is man’s fault? Relieve Gopinath, hang the revolutionary system!’ And if Gandhi ji would have sent such an ultimatum, the Governor general had to abide by it. The Governor general was so scared of Gandhiji’s ultimatums that they would stand trembling as seen during the famous one year freedom struggle. If that would have happed Saha would have been released from the gallows, and would have smeared one more curse of revenge to the community! Now if the Sanders’ murderer is sent to the gallows, we fear that Gandhiji would send a application saying, ‘What is man’s fault? Hanging him would be strengthening the braid of the curse of assassination!’ 
If we can implement this system of not holding any man responsible for his acts, and just punishing the methodology, we would see Satyug beginning today itself. Man will stop being man’s enemy. As soon as a thief is held he would be released with honour and only his theft would be sent to jail. Poor Sanders if this discovery would have happened while he was alive, or even better before his colleagues hit Lalaji, then instead of showering blows on Lalaji they would have hit the system of protest surrounding Lalaji in the free space around him! In Lucknow, the horse riding police would not have trampled the illegal procession under the horse feet, but would have taken the men out of the procession and trampled just the system of illegal precession. If the horses would not ride, instead of using a whip on them, only the laziness in them would have been whipped! Because as it’s not the fault of the man, but of the system that he adapts, similarly it is not the fault of the horse but the laziness in him. 
Not only that , other than the dead men if this immortal existence of the system that is visible to the eyes of Gandhiji at the sacred time of writing these articles, if he falls into our hands, then even after the World wars are fought, there would not be a drop of bloodshed. In the German was lakhs and lakhs of German and British soldiers would have stood face to face and fired their guns, but on whom? Not on people, what is their fault? – on the system or on British Imperialism that was floating three to four feet above the British soldiers in the form of air, and on Militarism that floated on the German Soldiers, then the English would have if needed sent in so much food that the German would have had feasts daily, but to 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
ensure that this system of Militarism would not receive a single grain of rice the British empire would have blockaded the nation! 
Well! Let Bygones be Bygones! At least now in the next world war at least we will aim at finishing this monstrous system that exists without the man and for that Gandhiji should publish it address soon. Just as the ghost lives beside the cradle in the palace according to Grandma’s tales; this system also probably may be found residing there! 
It is a fact, that Sanders’ murder was a very bad thing; but to prove it why create such lies, unrealistic and irrelevant statements? What is clear is clear; truth is truth! 
- Date 19th January 1929 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Complete Savarkar Literature 
Part 5 
Essays- articles- speeches (Part -1) 
Abhinav Bharat Closing Ceremony 
SwatantryaVeer Savarkar National Memorial Publication 
Speeches rendered at the time of Abhinav Bharat’s Closing Ceremony 
Swatantrya Veer Savarkar founded the secret revolutionary organization "Abhinav Bharat" at 1898, aimed at liberating India from the British rule. The aim was finally achieved at 1947 and India got its freedom. As the purpose was achieved, on 10th May, 1952, "Abhinav Bharat" was formally dissolved with much fanfare. On that day, a memorial was erected in memory all the freedom fighters, from 1857 to 1947, who laid down their lives for the freedom struggle. A respectful homage of sincere and deep admiration was paid to them. On this occasion, revolutionaries from across the country got together at Pune. 
On occasion of this formal dissolvement, a picture exhibition was also organized. Magnificent events were portrayed from the lives of the long dead revolutionaries. On the morning of 10th May, 1952, Savarkar inaugurated the ceremony, presided by Mr. Keshavrao Jedhe. Savarkar gave a speech, the salient points being as below: 
(1) Inaugurating the picture exhibition... 
Savarkar said "I am going to keep this speech a short one, especially relevant to the pictures exhibition. The British were very particular that no one should even remember the revolutionaries with any iota of respect. Maybe they would pardon photos of Lokmanya Tilak but carrying a photo of a revolutionary was a punishable crime. From this, it should be evident that the British knew, that the real threat to them was from these armed revolutionaries... rather than from any open and purportedly legal opposition. 
Today we are lucky enough, that we can freely show you not only the pictures of the armed revolutionaries - but also the portrayals of their military manoeuvrings. You will see the queen of Zhansi killing the British soldiers with her mighty sword. You will also see the great patriot Anant Kanhere shooting at Jackson. This, itself will make the fact evident that at least 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
three fourth of India has gained freedom. I am deliberately making this statement because nowadays some people often express doubts about this freedom - 
I can definitely say - for sure we have gained freedom - at least political freedom - we broke out of the shackles of the British Empire. The Indian flag, with the imprint of "Sudarshan Chakra", is flying high, having replaced the ubiquitous Union Jack. 
I will elaborate more on this in today's evening speech. 
Shivaji - The venerated leader for Maharashtrian Hindus 
When you go inside this exhibition of armed revolutionaries dedicated to millions who laid down their lives to free their country from the shackles of British dominion first go and stand front of the portrait of Shivaji Maharaj and pay your respects. Some of us might be Shudra, some Brahmin, some Kshtriaya, some Mahar, or Waishya what binds us together is we are all Maharashtrians he gave us this identity - the founder of Maharashtra he laid down the foundations of the Hindu kingdom. Undoubtedly Shivaji was the first armed revolutionary!!! 
Next you go and pay respects to Lokmanya Tilak. The rebellion was shaped up and constantly fuelled by him he could not be openly involved - as he had to awaken the people. However, he was a staunch believer of the armed struggle - "If there be a half/half chance, I would go ahead and go for an armed uprising", he used to say. However, he was a mass leader of great standing and had to take into account all the masses... 
I wanted to go a bit ahead and not caring much for the mass leadership took up the armed struggle. Our revolutionary organization was made of valiant people ready to face enemy guns our own sappers and miners. 
Next you will come to the portraits of valiant revolutionaries who fought and were killed in the revolution.You will, of course, pay homage to the portrayals of 1857 uprising. And also to the revolutionary followers of Vasudev Balwant Phadake. You will also see the portrait of the late Mr. Jyotiba Phule, a contemporary of Vasudev Balwant. The readers might know Mr. Phule as a great social reformer. However, in his youth, he uesd to mingle with armed revolutionaries. Along with Vasudev Balwant, he had trained in handling weapons, in the same place. It is understood that when a platoon of Vasudev Balwant was fighting in the Katraj pass, the late Mr. Phule supplied them food. In his book 'Gulamgiri', he mentions in passing that he inclined towards an armed revolt to oust the British from Indian. His views changed at times, is not of much consequence here... 
Afterwards you will see portrayals of revolutionaries executed by hanging. You will see the blood dripping from the broken necks. Salute every blood drop. This exhibition shows just a few pictures However, if you take into account the whole of India you will have to count in hundreds the deaths by hanging. And if you go farther back in history and include people executed during the 1857 uprising - you will have to count in thousands...' 
Why won't you find any revolutionaries still alive?... 
www.savarkarsmarak.com After eulogising other portraits and inspiring the listeners he ended the speech as below 'You will find lots of great and famous revolutionaries missing here For example, you won't find Senapati Bapat, who is sitting just next to me taking a bagful of bombs with him with the purpose of blasting away the British parliament. You will find no mention of Vamanrao Joshi who served a life sentence in Andaman with me, not of Barin Kumar, nor of the valourous Vasudev Balwant Gogate who shot at Mumbai governer Hotson. This should not be attributed to any carelessness on the part of the organizers. Rather we all living revolutionaries were omitted so no one should think that we wanted to highlight our own personalities and lives. 
All these celebrations are exclusively for remembering the dead revolutionaries. Homage will be paid only to them. Though it is no fault of ours that we are alive, we ourselves had to organize this celebration. So we decided to honour only the dead souls. I was against including my own portrait here, but the organizers very much wanted to include it in. I, however, did not give in to their wish and had it removed! It is indeed very gratifying to be a witness to this feeling of respect all over in Maharashtra and especially here in Pune, to this formal dissolvement of 'Abhinav Bharat'. 
My innumberable well wishers, here in India, often are of the opinion that I did not get the due recognition in keeping with my sacrifices. People who opposed the British rule, in a non- violent manner, and hence relatively suffered less, are being felicited significantly. Many such are getting land, money, or are assuming various offices. But we revolutionaries, who lost all worldly possesions - confiscated by the enemy are not going to get back anything. Our own government has openly said so. We couldn't care less if this is just or unjust. I don't have any feelings in this regard. Almost three fourth of our beloved country was freed is so lucky in itself. It is undoubtedly an honour to become a president of this great country countless people died so one of our own should get this honour and we were in the front ranks of these if we had been tempted by any prizes and offices would we have fought with the enemy with revolvers and bombs - knowing we were heading for the hanging rope?' 
This is indeed very gratifying... 
'Sincerely, if you ask me, we never thought we would see the day when our motherland got freedom. We never thought we would live to this day. We fought only so there would be such a day. What more to ask for than to be alive to see the aim achieved. I can tell about myself - I am higly gratified. I don't have any single frustrated thought. As my original goals stand achieved. It is indeed very gratifying to become a president of a free country. I have expressed my hearty congratulations to the great person who has assumed the said office - and assured him of my service to the nation as a common man. 
On the other hand, to fight relentlessly for freeing the country, and once the aim is achieved - to hand over the power to other fellow countrymen and spent the rest of life in selfless service of the nation as a common man it is very satisfying indeed!!! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
After beating the forces of Islam and Sikander, and handing over the power to Chandragupta, Arya Chanakya left for the Himalayas or so the tale goes... I think we all armed revolutionaries should follow in his footsteps this would wear well with our tradition of sacrificing everything for our motherland. 
(2) A homage to the armed revolutionaries Abhinav Bharat was formally dissolved on 10th May, 1952. The ceremony was organized in the Peshwa garden at the base of Parvati hill in Pune. A photograph of Netaji Subhashchandra Bose was the deemed president - Senapati Bapat was the acting president. A maginificent memorial staff was erected in front of the stage. 
On the memorial staff, decked with flowers and festival lights, was engraved the following words: 
'In memory of all those known and unknown armed revolutionaries who laid down their lives fighting the English, during the armed struggle, from 1857 to 1947, for liberating the country'. 
Mr. Tatyarao Karandikar, president of the welcoming committee, addressed the gathering. Afterwards, Senpati Bapat also addressed the gathering. Both explained the relevance of the celebrations... Then Vir Savarkar started his address - the speech was accompanied by great cheering from the crowd - "Long lives the freedom" - "Long live Veer Savarkar"... 
Salient points from the speech as below: 
1. Liberation is a collective success: 
The armed revolutionaries were labelled as strong headed, atrocious and murderers - not only by the enemy but by their fellow countrymen. It is indeed heartening to see the people here paying respects to them. The souls of the dead must be pleasantly surprised by all such expressions of reverence - if we believe the theory of soul outliving a human life. I cannot believe my own eyes. I would never have believed that I would live to see this day. The enemy, as well as some of our selfish and cowardly fellows had planned to wipe out all references to the armed struggle. 
They were bent upon falsifying the history. Just so that the true facts are written as history, we have arranged this ceremony. Here, though we are going to pay homage to the armed revolutionaries only, I am not saying that we were liberated solely because of them. I will also be guilty of falsifying history as said above. When the country got its freedom, a selfish attempt was underway to belittle the efforts of the armed struggle. I think it was my duty to point this out as I did not want the true history tampered with. 
So, when I inaugurated the All India Hindu Maha Sabha meet, I clearly stated the fact - No single party can take all credit for liberation of the country - instead concerted efforts of the last 3 generations and of many parties and workers got us our freedom. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
No doubt the 1857 uprising contributed to it. So did the great patriot Dadabhai Naurozi and Gokhale - who opposed in somewhat gentle manner. The party which was known for its extremist views, also should get the credit. All the thousands of patriots who opposed by non-cooperation also should get their due. 
I will go farther than this - and will also acknowledge all those, who never took part in any active opposition but prayed for the nation's freedom. A tale by Tulsidas, from Ramayana says it very well. When the armed forces of Rama invaded Lanka, the sea stopped them. Rama offered his obeisance but the sea did not budge. Then Rama took up his bow and arrow and challenged the sea. All of a sudden the sea gave way. Tulsidas says, "Bhayabeen hoya le preet"!!! (No feelings of love can be evoked without some fear)... Next, the Ram's men started constructing the bridge across the sea. A lizard was there and wanted to contribute towards the bridge construction. So it wetted itself with the seawater, then immersed itself in the sand, and deposited the sticking sand at the bridge site. This was a minuscule, next to nothing contribution. But the ardent wish to contribute towards the effort was all that mattered. Our feelings were akin to that of the lizard. 
We all should be fair, generous and honest to give all those who wished for freedom - all fighters, whether armed or unarmed... Such impartial recording of events would be the real history. But instead of adopting a fair and impartial attitude towards one and all, the non- violent people are misleading the people by claiming all the credit for freedom. They are even trying to remove all traces of the armed fighters from school textbooks and written history. The Congress party is in power today and so the false propaganda is being reflected in their behaviour. They are claiming that the freedom struggle began since 1920. This is just a beginning of their efforts to falsify history. We have always acknowledged the non-violent fighters as patriots. As I have said earlier, we should be grateful to them too. But they alone cannot take all the credit. Such people alone are being showered with favours of all kinds, from the state exchequer. These relatively second rate patriots are getting land, money and are being offered important offices. Voices against such plunder by these 'Congress patriots' are being heard from within Congress itself. 
Madras Chief Minister Mr. Rajgopalachari recently declared that the exchequer is not going to bear this burden anymore. If this all, I would not even have mentioned it here. Needless to say, that the armed fighters, long dead, cannot accept any gifts, even if the Kohinoor diamond itself is offered to them. Would Dhingra, Kanahiya, or Bhagat Singh, have willingly chosen the death by hanging if they had wished to encash their patriotism? They would have got themselves registered as 'A' class prisoners - and would have enjoyed sweet lime fruits - and would have come out and got themselves glorified. We are ever grateful to anyone who was imprisoned even for a day, as a freedom fighter. But if Prime Minister Pandit Nehru - we salute his patriotism - starts openly abusing Khudiram and other, labelling them as mentally unsound - for the sake of the historical truth, and in the best national interest, we must say that the greatest glory is to those who died by rope - or were killed in armed encounters. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
The likes of Nehru know, in their heart of hearts, that their sacrifices compare as second rate to those of Chafekar and Subhash Chandra, who was burnt alive in a plane. This injustice prompted us to arrange this ceremony. We are openly paying homage to all the armed freedom fighters, from 1857 to 1947, who pioneered the freedom movement. 
It is highly unlikely that todays' youth will know the odds against the revolutionaries faced, fifty years ago. Any revolution, political or social, needs either to be influenced by a great personality or social upheaval. We don't have time to discuss such philosophical aspects here - but to give you some idea of those times, I will cite a few examples... 
Such were the times when our nation had lost its identity. No flag, no name, nothing - British bayonets had shackled it. It could not even voice its dishonour. All our millions countrymen were even not aware of all this dishonour -So there was no question of any anger over it.' 
Should one wait for the society to awaken? 
'Though all the society was shamelessly apathetic, a few individuals were getting excited. They wanted to fight the enemy and avenge all this dishonour heaped upon the motherland. All countrymen had this duty - liberate the nation from the enemy rule. These countrymen wanted to do their bit, irresptive of the apathy of the masses. They wanted to fight back, in whatever way they could. Brisith officers who were involved in atrocities were assassinated. 
Imagine a bed ridden widowed mother. She has three grown up sons, but they are careless and whimsical. No one goes for a doctor, instead get busy with books or astrology. However, one son feels for the mother. He does not care what rest of his brothers do, but goes and gets a doctor. Would anyone dare to blame him? 
You should look at the armed revolutionaries in the same light. This might appear funny to some here, but the illiterate masses thought that the British rule was willed so by Mother Sita. How could we, mere mortals. go against Sita's wish? They had a staunch belief in the English rule. On the other hand, some who knew English, accepted the British sovereignty for the good of India, willed so by God. See Gokhale's 'Servants of India Society's motto - or Dadabhai Naurozi's slogans,for example. The Congress meetings used to begin and conclude with cheers for the British king. 
So the handlful of revolutionaries had to follow whatever way possible, to fight back the enemy and discharge their duty towards the nation. Their actions would be like a flash of the lightening, and the dozing masses would awaken for a moment.' 
Recounting a tale of a procession 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
'Today Lord Hardings is going to preside over an imperial assembly. All Indian kings and princes are going to attend it by procession. Millions are crowding the terraces to watch the fanfare. The procession is led by Lord Hardings, the Viceroy of India, sitting in a bedecked howdah, on an elephant. He is flanked by hundreds of English cavalrymen, brandishing swords. The union jack is flying high and guns are being fired in salutation. 
Not one word of dissent from the millions congregated there. However, a group of five Hindu youths want to avenge this insult to their motherland... As the procession reached Chandni Chowk, and was getting showered with flowers, a coconut like object fell on the Howdah and exploded like a cannon ball. The mahout was killed on the spot, and Hardings was badly wounded, but survived. The procession fizzled out - it became a funeral procession. 
The news spread like fire. I will read out Madanlal Dhingra's statement - and then I need not say any more...' 
Thoughts of a revolutionary... 
And so Savarkar read out Dhingra's english statement, well known as 'Challange'. 
'This statement is an invaluable documentary evidence, showing very clearly how a revolutionary thinks. The British had destroyed each and every stage from which one could proclaim freedom. The only stage from which one could appeal the people to rise against the British was the scaffold. One who went there was just a step away from heaven. 
Armed revolutionaries were often labelled as murderers, by their own countrymen. Dhingra answered all such accusations by saying "I believe that a nation held in bondage with the help of foreign bayonets is in a perpetual state of war.” Meaning the war is already on! And about the guerrilla tactics, “ Since open battle is rendered impossible to a disarmed race, I attacked by surprise; since guns were denied to me, I drew forth my pistol and fired.” ' 
Freedom struggle is holy act... 
'Dhingra was a devout Hindu. He believed that the freedom struggle is a holy act. He categorically stated “As a Hindu, I feel that a wrong done to my country is an insult to God. Her cause is the cause of Shri Ram. Her services are the services of Shri Krishna." I won't wait for other. "A son like myself has nothing else to offer the Mother but has own blood. And so I sacrifice the same at her alter. Because the only lesson required in India, at present is to learn how to die! And the only way to teach it, is by dying ourselves. (Therefore) I shed English blood as humble revenge for the inhuman hangings and deportation of patriotic Indian youths.” 
So that others are not incriminated for his act, Dhingra stated "In this attempt I have consulted none, but my own conscience; I have conspired with none but my own duty." At the end, he prays to God as “My only prayer to God is : may I be reborn of the same mother 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
and may I be ready for the same cause till the cause is successful and she stands free for the good of humanity and the glory of God!.” 
Forty years after Dhingra was hanged, in 1947 India got its freedom. The British courts and rulers were committing atrocities by unjustly sending people away to the rope or life sentence. They thought they were protected by the might of the British forces. However, incidents as told above, sent a chill down their spines. These revolutionaries had their own court. They knew if they were not cautious, all the British might would not save them. Millions were inspired by all this to valourous undertakings.' 
A train of revolutionaries... 
'To avenge the death by hanging of Khudiram and Kanaihyalal, Dhingra shot dead the Curson Wyllie, right hand of Chief Secretary of state. Dhingra was hanged to death. To avenge this, Anant kanhere shot dead Nasik collector, Jackson. Various atrocities were committed by Tuticorin magistrate Ash. He sentenced Chidamber Pille of Abhinav Bharat to a life term. Vanchunath Iyer, member of Abhinav Bharat's Pondecherry branch, assassinated Ash. Only in the Midnapur district, three English magistrates were assassinated in succession, to avenge other revolutionaries. Lord Hardings was almost killed in a bomb attack. To avenge the fatally wounded Lala Lajpatrai, Bhagat Singh assassinated Sauders. Punjab Governer Sir O'Dwyer fired at and killed many innocents at the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. Udham Singh assassinated him in Caxton Hall, London. 
English weapons depots like Chittagong were looted by the revolutionaries. In the First World War, the Indian soldiers rebelled against the British. During the Second World War, the British had to recruit the Indians, as there was no choice. Subhash Chandra raised a mighty and seasoned force of 60000, which started for Delhi. The British dominion was truly challenged by these armed uprisings. The Indian Navy also joined the rebellion. As far as we know, Subhash Chandra died a hero's death We have elected him as posthumous president for this ceremony. 
We want to openly pay homage to all these fighters today.' 
The Closing Ceremony is also an Opening Ceremony 
Again we should keep in mind that, the celebrations and closing ceremonies of the great victory that we have achieved and completion of our aim, are just a the opening ceremonies of what we have to achieve, completion of the national victories and remaining national activities. 
For this reason only, yesterday on May 10th the day of the revolution, the freedom festival we celebrated, and paid our homage of gratitude and extreme satisfaction to all the late revolutionaries and took a moment, to dissolve the World famous revolutionary secret organization ‘Abhinav Bharat’ that was established for the working towards the freedom acquisition at the beginning of the century and continued its struggle till the time India was 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
free from the rule of the British, as was our duty. As the British rule has been eradicated from all over India. And now on we have to work towards guarding our freedom and developing our country. And for that purpose, we do not need the secretive and small weapons, the hide and seek methods, and underground existence, that was need previously. Now we have a capable and a thousand times stronger security and guarding war metals and army in our national armoury, awaiting our orders. If I can come up with a operational system for our new Ruler Post Independence, I will speak about it tomorrow. 
But now it’s a new ball and new game. We are beginning to turn a new leaf of our history. On today’s occasion, it is apt to say that, the Abhinav Bharat Organisation is dissolved as India is completely free from the clutches of the British rule. Now securing this newly acquired freedom is our prime duty. Now the responsibility of protecting our nation with new techniques, methods and helping it develop, lies on the shoulders of the young generation! 
The Rule should fall into the Hands of our Swadesh brothers. 
There is one point that I feel in necessary to be raised and at least discussed a little in this speech. Till date those who fought against the British, with non-violent methods, we all know the history or detailed reports of their efforts. As those reports could be openly published. Autobiographies and biographies of all the patriots from Dadabhai to the recent Sarojini Naidu have been published. The way it has been published before, the British government has not opposed its publication. But the information about armed revolutionaries was kept secretive by they, themselves for the purpose of completion of the mission. As for o write the British Government, it was impossible to write a favourable history of the acts of these people. As the British did not even tolerate, the names of the armed revolutionaries being published in newspapers. This behaviour of the British is a certification that the British Government feared the armed revolutionaries more than the non-violent ones, as the armed revolutionaries attacked the Achilles heel of the British. An acceptance certificate! For these two three reasons, the work of the armed revolutionaries was never known to the public as well as highly educated class also and nor are they aware as yet. What the people know mostly is that the Revolutionary party is the one that kills the British officers from time to tome by shooting them or blasting them with bombs, sometimes the looting the British treasures, and a group of psychotic young men being hanged to death or sentenced to Kalapani for some petty acts for the freedom of India, who have a aimless, unplanned, uncoordinated, irregular, political agenda, arising like a comet and immediately vanishing tradition. Without completely using abuses for the revolutionary groups, the few domestic and international writers who write about us also call this group as anarchists or terrorists. I have mentioned a little about the Terrorism as the one weapon with which we hunted down the British officers one by one, looted their treasury, armouries, and at times attacked the power houses and with whatever weapon available, and generated fear in the minds of the British and the consequences or impacts it had on the British government in the past century 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
of the Indian history, in the last two speeches. When there was one terrorist attack by the group at least 5-10 British officers would be killed, shocking the public and the British Government, with one plot discovered 10-15 revolutionaries had to pay with their lives for it. Skim through the history from the Marley- Minto improvements and you will see the truth. The rights generated from these improvements would be handed over to the Non-violent group. But the revolutionaries never felt bad about it. We hoped that more and more rights should fall into the hands of our brothers in Swadesh, and struggling ahead for that was our life’s only aim and motto. 
Such revolutionary attacks under the banner of terrorism are an effective weapon. However, killing a five- fifty British officer per year, or by small armed attacks here and there on the enemy power houses, and even shattering the peace of the every so strong British Empire by these armed attack, and would compel them to leave this country is an impossible thing, as believed by the so called wise men of the non- violent groups and their jealous outrages beliefs, and who condemn and purposely tarnished the revolutionary group commonly known as Extremists among the people is absolutely false. Once we erase that, then the future true history can be written. 
England’s Military Danger is our Chance of Freedom 
Anyone can see from the available literature of that time and the movements of that time that the organisation Abhinav Bharat established at the beginning of the century had included Militarisation and Foreign politics along with Terrorism as a part of their agenda. Militarisation means propagation of the revolution in the Indian army under the British armed forces in India and as many revolutionaries as possible being recruited in that army. Our foreign politics means while penetrating the Indian army under the British, on the other hand establishing a strong armed revolutionary group amongst the British enemies or at least non- friendly nations, especially Europe and Japan for our Freedom struggle. And by propagation the factual conditions getting the sympathy of the people and Government officials of Europe and Japan. At some point of time one of this strong powerful country, will engage in the war with England. Therefore England’s military danger will be a master key to India’s freedom. This being our principle of warfare tactic, in such a war we could corner England and accepting as much as possible ammunition from its enemy, and start a revolt amongst the Indian Army and the public. With the help of the foreign help, we will revolt in India and attack the British Government in India from outside. This was the plan of our revolutionary Military. If such a chance fails then try for a second, and so on, till we are victorious. If need be we would fight for generations together. The summary of this Military Strategy, was encompassed in one basic principle which is now, manifold, that is, Revolutionary was knows no truce save victory and death. 
The Propaganda of the Revolution amongst the soldiers. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
The brief description of how we immediately implemented a part of our military strategy may be given in this speech as much as possible. As soon as I reached England and establish the strong foundation of Abhinav Bharat, in the middle of London, in order to propagate the revolution and the hatred of the British, amongst the soldiers, hundreds of small leaflets were secretly printed and started sending them to the main recruiting site and army camp of the Indian army, Punjab. To actually spread the word that keep a negative attitude towards the British at the British army camp was very tough! But it was easy to the deliver the leaflets to the families of the Jat, Sikh and Dogara in the villages these people hailed from. For this purpose we collected as many addresses of the recruits of the army camps and the villagers and regularly sent them approximately 2 – 3 leaflets through post on a indefinite schedule. The leaflets were originally written in English and then translated into Hindi and Gurumukhi by the Sikh colleagues in Abhinav Bharat. These leaflets were written on wax paper and their impressions were printed on a wooden printer and we would stay awake the whole night and print the leaflets in our rooms itself. Because Abhinav Bharat was the first to start this kind of anti – British propaganda all of a sudden the British did not notice this for a long time. And using the British Postal Offices, Abhinav Bharat propagated against them through the hundreds of leaflets posted to various addresses without a sound! Funny thing was, that the English postmen delivered these letters. We came to know about it later. When there was no noise about this, even we doubted that as soon as the ship reached the Sindh harbour, did the British officers throw them into the water? But after some months we started receiving the certifications from the British itself! And made us extremely happy! The British Officers in order to propagate British loyalty amongst the Indian Army regularly released a Government News newspaper called the “Fauji Akhbar”. It was printed in Hindi but in roman script. We used to regularly read it in England. And then one day we saw a headline in the news newspaper typed in Bold, “Anarchists people are sending treason inducing letters on the addresses of the soldiers and their families, as has been discovered. If anyone finds such letters they should be handed over to the officer immediately; Such treason letters if purposely read or kept with oneself will be a military offence. As time went by , the headings of our letter were also published in the “Fauji Akhbar”. Not only that the comments made in these treason letters was also reacted to in the “Fauji Akhbar” with strong, explosive criticism. Further the young followers of Sardar Ajitsingh from Punjab established the Revolutionary groups, and when they could lay hands on one of our leaflets, they would print hundreds of copies and secretly distribute them furthermore. Bengal, Madras etc regions also propagated such leaflets not only in the army but also in the reserved Police forces and created havoc. 
The meaning of Militarisation 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Followed by this operation a book “War of Indian Independence of 1857’ was published. It was a proven and Explosive history of how to start a huge mutiny to overturn the British rule. Later the Gadar party of America, translated the book in Punjabi, Hindi and Urdu regional languages, then the details of how Bhagat Singh and gang printed two English copies of the same and sent it to the Indian National Army formed by Subhash Chandra Bose, and how it gave the All India Revolutionary Party a thinking soul and how it practically guided a Armed Mutiny, How the revolutionaries proclaimed it as the ‘Gita’ of thousands of revolutionaries are known to all, so there is no need to make an issue of it here. 
While propagating secretly in the British Indian Army, we never said do not join the army. Rather through our bulletins and books we said staying in the army, and taking all the ammunition supplied, more and more new young people should keep joining the army. And when you get the opportunity, and England is at war with one of its foreign enemy they should get their practical training of warfare at that time. Then when the time for armed mutiny arises, these lakhs of armed and trained warriors in the British Army would revert on the British the way the 1857 warriors did, aiming at the Freedom of our motherland. My definition of Militarisation right from the beginning of the century to the time the British rule in India ended in 1947 was the same. And based on this principle itself all the revolutionary parties continued their struggle and kept fighting. 
The Foreign Politics in Europe was run by the Indian revolutionaries itself. 
Along with this militarisation, on establishing Abhinav Bharat, as per its agenda I started the propaganda of the Indian National freedom struggle and forming friendly relations with the Enemy nations of England in the foreign countries. 
While writing the true history, it should be borne in mind that for the Indian national revolution, any military coups that took place from Germany to Japan during both the World Wars, they were only possible courtesy the united efforts of the Indian Armed revolutionary Parties. Armed war or anti British Foreign Military Politics did not fit in the ideology of the Indian Congress, Home rule party or any non-violent party. Not only that, but mainly Congress was openly supporting the British in the name of democracy and justice in both the world wars! 
Abhinav Bharat was the first to initiate foreign Politics in the view of Armed National Revolution. We continued to print and distribute small-small handbills against the British to the secret revolutionary parties in Ireland and Egypt, the countries under the British Empire and in European countries like Germany rapidly. The secret handbills mainly said that, ‘The Indian Revolutionary Party is become strong to overturn the British rule in India and gain total Independence. It wishes to form friendly relations with your country and expects and hopes to gain your sympathy and support in this mission.’ As I am just mentioning the gist of the main events, I will just say that, ‘After lots of such efforts, in many a countries, 
www.savarkarsmarak.com especially Socialist, Democrats, and the main people in the European Revolutionary Party, the head of the Abhinav Bharat gained respect! 
The First National Flag of the Independent India 
Finally the head of the international conference that conducted the annual rally of the Democratic party held in Europe thought of calling a representative of the revolutionary party of India. Accordingly the grandson of Karl Marx and the editor of the French newspaper of Paris ‘Humanity’ invited their acquaintance and a member of the Abhinav Bharat, Madam Cama, as a representative. All the members agreed that Madam Cama should go. In that European Independent Nations conference a flag of each country was hoisted. But at that time the helpless India did not have its own National Flag! Even our Congress also flaunted the Bitish Union Jack as our national flag, and paid obeisance to. Madam Cama and Harishchandra Das had an idea of the discussion going on in the Abhinav Bharat in this regards. The Paris trained artist Harishchandra Das immediately drew a beautiful Indian national Flag. Carrying that along Madam Cama went to Stuttgart (Germany). When it was her turn to give a speech, while rendering a illuminating speech on behalf of the armed revolutionary organisation Abhinav Bharat, that aimed at overturning the British Rule and gaining Total Independence she unfurled the flag and moved it excitedly front and back and said, “Behold!! This is the flag of Independent India.” At that time, immediately all the international representatives stood up and saluted the flag! That was the First national Flag of the independent India unfurled at the International Nations conference!!! 
While showing off and hoisting this first national flag of independent India, Abhinav Bharat explained that, This national flag is provisional, When our India will be totally free, then our independent nation’s ethics committee will create a final National flag, and we will treat that as our final national flag. 
This incidence from the conference was praised in many newspapers of Europe and other countries, and published photographs of Madam Cama and the flag. An Indian princess unfurls the colours of Independent India. Such headlines published in the Newspapers of Russia etc made us revolutionaries extremely happy and proud! 
But this equally angered the British newspapers and Government! The idea and action of the revolutionaries was really courageous! Because the British Government officials, had convinced all the European nations that, though the Indians leaders want some minor improvements they are completely loyal to the British Empire and to support that the British Political council would publish the resolutions passed by our so called National Party, the Indian National Party paying their obeisance to the British Emperor displaying their loyalty to him, in the newspapers of the Independent Nations around the world. But Abhinav Bharat’s 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
expressed display of the Anti-British Revolution in the foreign land, exposed the pretence of the British. 
The first Bomb Blast! 
Following this Abhinav Bharat’s Bapat and his followers were secretly learning the art of preparing the Hand bomb to a Time bomb from the Russian Revolutionaries in Paris. Out of them Hemchandra Das, a Bengali revolutionary on returning to India, prepared a Bomb, that Yugantar secret organisation’s Khudiram Bose threw on the Kingsford Magistrate and its blast killed two British officers. This first successful bomb blast in India was the fruit of the efforts of Abhinav Bharat. 
This bomb blast shattered India’s old political scenario and from that began the bloody Armed Revolutionary era. This was followed by the killing of Lord Curzon Wyllie in London by Madanlal Dhingra causing a chaos in all the foreign nations about India; Pandit Shamji’s “Indian Sociologist”in France, My newspaper “Talwar” (sword) under the editorship of Chattopadhyay and Madam Cama’s “ Vande Martaram” under the editorship of Lala Hardayal’s these three English newspapers run by the three members of the Abhinav Bharat propagating the Indian revolutionary ideology and events; when Anant Kanhere killed Jackson in Nasik, I wrote “the Martyr of Nasik” an article in Talwar in which I printed extracts from articles published in Germany about ‘the German Military fortification going on in Haligold and the accurate and thoughtful prediction of the soon nearing war between England and Germany because of it’; The secret initiation of discussion between us and the German Police Officers and the political circles about the military mutiny by the Indian revolutionary party in India during the possible Anglo- German war; finally my arrest in London by the British; While bringing me to India my jump into the sea, Swim across the sea, at Marseilles after entering the French land for a mile my arrest by the British officer, that created a furore in France; causing International concern about England being accused of challenging inter- relations between all the European nations by its attack on the French Soil and the famous case at Hague in front of the judges elected by all the European nations to release me; the great revolt by the Gadar Party founded by Lala Hardayal, a Abhinav Bharat member from America and recruiting hundreds of Sikhs and the revolutionary awakening caused by that in the Sikh army in India; In order to start a armed mutiny at the time of the Anglo- German World war, an courageous Attempt to send a steam boat loaded with weapons and Volunteers from America to India; and one such steam boat on reaching Calcutta the open fight between the revolutionaries and the British Officers; The secret raids by the Bengali revolutionaries with bombs and pistils killing the British Officers; A detailed plot of an open armed muting through the propaganda against the British in the army camps in Punjab, under the leadership of Rasbihari Bose, all these events were taking place so 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
rapidly and extensively that, when I reached London in 1906, my paper plan of association with the anti–British nations for the Indian Independence and replaying the 1957 mutiny when a chance was opportune was actively initiated by Abhinav Bharat and the Grand shape that it took in such a short time, though I was arrested and imprisoned , astonished me and made me feel grateful. 
From the beginning of the First World war, Hardayal, Chattopadhyay, Pandit Shamji, Acharya etc, leaders of the Abhinav Bharat and the revolutionary parties of Bengal, America and Japan etc. had an unwritten pact with Germany, to provide weapons, finance and warfare experts for a armed revolt against the British. While Germany was gain victory after victory from the very beginning of the World war, The Indian revolutionarie sin Germany were called to form a committee to communicate with The German Officers. It had Hardayal, Chattopadhyay, Pillai, Acharya of Abhinav Bharat and members of the Bengal, American Revolutionary Parties, Swami Vivekanand’s brother, Dr. Bhupendra and two there more leaders. The discussions with the German officers and King Kaiser himself were done through Chattopadhyay. When King Mahendra Pratap came to Switzerland they also had a meeting arranged by Chattopadyay only. 
First Provisional Government of Independent India 
To represent the future Government of Independent India and who has the approval of Germany, Turkey, etc, German allied nations such a revolutionary committee was called the First Provisional Government of Independent India! However, this should be clearly said that, and later Raja Mahendra pratap led a delegation headed by him (Independent India Provisional Government) and sent to Afghanistan that and this Chattopadhyayay committee’s Provisional Government in Germany have nothing to do with each other. Raja Mahendra Prataps direction was completely different. Chattopadhyayay committee’s Provisional Government in Germany did not agree with that direction. 
Whatever Financial and Weapons aid needed by this committee, for the planned revolution in India, was given by Germany as ordered by The King Kaiser, and whatever possible by the German Soldiers, this we should not forget out of Political gratefulness. Germany breaking through the web of the British fleets sent in some armoured ships into the Bay of Bengal in order to support the National Revolution. It is well known that when the armoured ships means the Emden suddenly attacked Madras with a bombs, and created a fear in India and to the British navy. The Emden aimed mainly at attacking the Andaman island and releasing me and the other revolutionaries present there and then attacking Burma and join the British Indian Army ready to revolt with the support of the revolutionaries and then from there, head to India. How Emden’s piracy stopped the transit of the British Naval ships in the Bay of Bengal, How the rations for the British people in the Andaman Islands etc. was stopped; some details about this are found in my book “Janmathep”(“Life Imprisonment”). The Gadar 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
party of America had planned to sent a independent fighter Airplane to Andaman to suddenly rescue me from the Andaman prison, but within a period of two months Emden was surrounded by the British Naval ships and arrests made, so all that was cancelled. 
Sardar Ajit Singh, Manavendra Rai, Raja Mahendra Pratap, Rasbihari Bose Taraknath Das and many such revolutionaries all were trying whatever possible from whichever countries they were in prepared to start a revolt. From various war fields, mixed with the German army platoons, the Indian revolutionaries were fighting first hand with the British troops. Khankhoje, Amba Prasad Sufi follower revolutionaries went way upto Iran and in the chaos ensued there did not refrain from giving a fight to the British Army there. On this side, in the many armed fights from Hong kong, Singapore and Burma to Iran between the revolutionaries and the British hundreds of British lost their lives and similarly thousands of revolutionaries also died in the war. Many were hanged and many sent to Life imprisonment. 
Germany puts the condition of Indian Independence: 
As the impact of the armed revolutionaries’ foreign agitation just before the tide of German victory settled the German Emperor King Kaiser sent a 14 point agenda for truce to President Nelson and out of the 14 conditions were suggested the Germans demanded was one that said, The British have to give India their Total national Independence! 
The job of Indian Politics to reach these heights starting from scratch in the World Political scenario, was achieved only due to the relentless sacrifices, courage, far-sightedness and fearless program of the Indian Armed Revolutionaries. None of the non-violent parties in India had anything to do with the armed revolutionary schemes. Congress was calling this foreign and domestic fight mission as Sedition and Treason, criticising louder than the British people. And kept praying!!! However, some of the extremists’ leaders amongst them after gaining independence kept demanding Home rule. 
The Revolutionaries malignant hope: 
Finally Germany lost the First World War. However, the Indian revolutionaries did not completely lose hope. Because the revolutionaries were aware that the Fighting hand of Germany would actually reach India was not possible. It was almost impossible that the German weaponry and war expertise could reach India by road from Turkey to Afghanistan and successfully help the Revolution in India. And through the sea it was just impossible. As the British and American navy had unchallenged ownership of the seas from the Pacific to the Bay of Bengal and the only powerful Asian country Japan, had joined the British allies in that World war. As the revolutionaries were well aware of this situation in advance, when in that World war from year 1914 to 1918, uniting with the British enemy they caused as much trouble as they could to the British, the brought up the issue of Indian Independence in the World political scenario so much so that, it became a obstacle in the British path and gave it 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
international importance and generated fear about it in the British minds; actually started mutinies involving thousands of Soldiers from the British Indian army and spread the fire of Indian independence and revolt against the British and attained the milestone towards the path of Independence, their enthusiasm doubled and they started to hope that if in any such world war we could corner the British and get our independence. 
The credit for protecting the History goes to the Enemy! 
For those of you or some novice historian, want a more detailed description of the Armed revolutionaries’ secret, explosive and international efforts during the first Anglo-German World war then they should read the book the Reilly Report published by the enemy of the revolutionaries the British. Most of our Indian author would tremble at the thought of writing about the armed Revolutionaries and they called themselves a non-violent party and believed it to be a sin even to utter the names of the Martyrs and still do. Hence, if the Revolutionary History is alive today , the credit goes to our enemy, the British propaganda office who printed the government reports like the Reilly Report. 
After the first World war ended in 1918, the armed revolutionary party did not sit quietly waiting on the second chance of a World war. Excited by the first success they started down the same path with increased enthusiasm starting more agitations on a larger level. On the other hand, revolutionaries kept spreading the revolution across Japan, China, America, and Mexico to Switzerland, Germany, and Sweden, in Europe and to Iran, Afghanistan, and all the national capitals. The British trying to break down this revolt had to face a lot of trouble too. In India itself, in order to rebel against the British rule and to spread the word of revolution in the British Indian army, the secret organisations of the Revolutionaries picked the British officers and killed them one after the other, looting their treasury and sometimes attacking and raiding the British armouries and looting their weapons had created a havoc. This is not the time to tell about this in detail. And now we do not have the time for that in this speech. However, just to understand the outline the Bhagat Singh- Rajguru episodes; Kakori’s Sanyal, - Bismil followers martyr episode; Anandsingh, Suryasen etc looted British armoury, The British Governor’ shot dead by the revolutionaries at various places, just a mention of these episodes is enough to understand the efforts of the Armed revolutionaries at the time of the First world war. 
The Second Chance for Independence 
The World war that would attack the British Governance at its roots eagerly waited by the Indian revolutionaries that chance finally came! 
In the year 1939, the Germans started their Second World War against the British. The revolutionaries in and out of India pulled up their socks to make good this second chance. The strategy was planned in the First World War itself and charged by the experiences of the 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
military coups and adjusting to the new conditions they dealt the same had for the British. The Revolutionaries living abroad openly joined hands with Hitler who had become the warrior God for Germany and started mutinies at their respective places against the British. 
The trained revolutionaries’ like Sardar Ajit Singh, entered the British War in Italy and requested Italy’s renowned whole and soul Mussolini, to support the Indian revolution in whatever weapon aid they could extended. And Mussolini also accepted it and supplied thousands of weapons to the Indian Soldiers in the British army to start the revolt. Germany also arranged the same. The aim was with the revolutionary help extended by Germany and Italy was to be used to develop Anti British sentiment and Love for the national Independence and forming a freedom army. 
However, though this Indian revolutionary army with the help extended by Germany and Italy attacked the British and made them run helter- skelter gaining victory over victory- just as reaching India was impossible in the First world war, it was similarly impossible in the Second World war. 
Rasbihari Bose 
But one very positive thing that happened in the Second World War and did not happen in the First World War was the one strong nation that could reach India, there was a possibility that Japan would fight against the British and American forces. The one person who took relentless steps in that direction and for years lived a life of a refugee in Japan and continued his propaganda of the Indian revolution was Rasbihari Bose!! 
Rasbihari Bose and Me could not meet in all are lives. And now he has passed away. Rasbihari Bose entered the revolution long after I enter the revolution in 1899. His mind kept burning hearing the agitation and activities of the Abhinav Bharat in England. Hence when he started his communication with me through letters he clearly told me that I was his Inspiration. Now all his great revolutionary work is known to all. The British themselves have documented it in the Reilly report. After my release from the Andaman Islands and from the house arrest in 1939 he first wrote a letter to me that he published in a newspaper. Then he started writing to me directly. He was in total agreement of my Militarisation and Revolutionary agenda. I have already mentioned his efforts before and after the First World War in spreading the word of the revolution in The British Indian Army in Punjab in my speeches yesterday and today. 
Later when I became the president of the Hindu Mahasabha from Bengal to Punjab a lot of revolutionaries joined us. Similarly, Rasbihari Bose established a Hindu Mahasabha in Japan and himself became the President. He published some of my speeches and the brief autobiography in the Japanese newspapers. He used to inform me about his secret efforts of propagating the Indian Revolution and the work of the Hindu Mahasabha in Japan in a secret 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
code. When the Second World War started, the British spies kept me and Bose under constant vigil and the above letters stopped arriving by post. But once or twice, somehow send me two letters through two Buddhist monks. The two Buddhist monks said they were staying at a small Buddhist monastery in Mumbai. In the first letter he informed that like the First World War, Germany has signed a treaty with Italy and Japan and will send financial, weapon and military aid and suggested to be prepared. I did not answer in writing but orally asked, ‘Is it true that Japan is planning to enter the war against England?’ If Japan enters the war , till Germany is on a winning tide it will be beneficial.’ In the second letter Rasbihari replied that within the current year (year 1940), by the month of April, Japan will definitely blow the war horns. But I received the second letter from Rasbihari somewhere near about April 1940. Thereafter the Buddhist monks never came to me. I don’t know if they disappear themselves or the British spies arrested them under the suspicion of Spying. 
Taking the opportunity of the Second World War, I expressly started the militarisation for the Revolution against the British all across the country immediately. I had the support of the old revolutionary leaders and Dr. Munje headed Hindu mahasabha’s far sighted and political leaders in this. Therefore the Hindu Mahasabha’s All India Organisation took part in this militarisation. 
Both the parties are Imperialist 
As soon as the Second World War started in the year 1939, Congress leaders declaring the Britain, France Allied forces as Democratic and as their slogan was ‘To save Democracy in the World’ decided to uphold the British side and considered Hitler, Mussolini allied as British enemies are trying to conquer others’ nations and having monstrous ambition are aggressive and impatient. But Hindu Mahasabha accepted my principle and passed a strong resolution that the British Allied Nations say that, they are protectors of Democracy and Freedom and hence have entered the war and Hitler, Mussolini Allied Forces are Imperialists trying to impose aggressive and impatient. We do not believe the declaration of Britain, and we believe that both the parties are Imperialists. At such a time, which party to side is a question of principles. To follow the strategy beneficial to the national well-being is the best option. And militarisation is the best options to ensure the independence of India and the future security of India. For this purpose as many Indians should enter the British Indian Army, should get practical training in warfare in the European war fields and be armed. For this purpose only the Hindu Mahasabha is ready to help the British in India. Under those circumstances the all India organisation like Hindu Mahasabha within the legal boundaries passed such a resolution. 
After Centuries the England soil faced enemy attack. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Britain faced a bigger crisis in the Second World War as compared to the First World War. The sea, around it that made it difficult for a warrior like Napoleon also to attack the English soil, could no longer protect England. Those barricades around the sea were broken down and armed with the new and huge planes and new and terrible ammunition Hitler attacked and bombed the London city and made the English people run for their lives. After many centuries Britain’s soil was attacked by the enemy weapons bringing the war fields at their doorsteps. Cities were surrounded by fire and earth shook like earthquakes. The women and children of Britain were experiencing the terrible war for the first time. Facing such a crisis in Europe, England had to gather their British soldiers and bring them in large numbers to Europe, and were forced to bring the British Indian Army to Europe to fight on different front across Iran, Africa and Europe. Therefore the British officers had to try extremely hard to recruit the Indian people in their Army, Navy and Air force. At the same time the Hindu Mahasabha had as mentioned earlier, passed a resolution for Militarisation, and in order to encourage the Hindus to join the army the Viceroy called me to meet him as the President of the Hindu Mahasabha. In that meeting, I clearly told, ‘Your British Government needs the Indian Army for the British interest. And we feel it is important to the Indian interest that maximum number of Indians should join the Indian Army. Hence for this mutual benefit we can support the British Government in this World war. Just cancel the condition, whereby the Indian soldiers do not receive a commission in the British Army. Some Indian Unlisted Castes are not allowed to join the army, stop such discrimination. The Viceroy immediately agreed to the improvements that I suggested and the Hindu Mahasabha agreed to support the British and recruit Indians indiscriminately in all the there wings of the army. 
First take the Military training! 
During the First World War Tilak had asked for some more concessions, but they were not approved. Even then Tilak encouraged Indians to join the army through a meeting held in Pune and writing an article. Now the British Viceroy had to agree the previous demands as well as the new ones I had suggested due to his crisis. In that also, I had promised to recruit only Hindus in the Army. The Viceroy did not refuse that too.To take maximum advantage of this 
profitable situation I asked Dr Munje and some other old revolutionary leaders to tour the country and propagate Militarisation and encourage the Hindus to join the army! Display your valour in the European war fields and get trained in the art of warfare! That will be beneficial for our country in the future! In some of my meetings the British officers were also present. Even in their presence I clearly told first join the army and takes over as much weapon and ammunition as possible! Learn how to fight the modern European warfare! Then tomorrow we will see whom to and where to aim the weapons! 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Even though the Hindu Mahasabha was running the movement of Hindu Militarisation, it actually was a part of the Abhinav Bharat! To say the least about it, it would suffice to say that within the first two years of the world war the Defence Minister in the Parliament while replying to one of our questions announced that in most of the war fields in the world the Indian army is fighting. In the Indian Army there are 65 % Hindus and 30 to 32 % Muslims. Means before our militarisation the Hindus in the Indian army were not even 35% and not the Number has increased to 65%! And the number of Muslims has gone from 60-65% to 30-32%. This was the success of the slogan Militarise Hindudom. 
Sudden meeting with Subhashchandra Bose 
Coincidently on this chanceon 22nd june 1940, the then National Hero and now Netaji Subhashchandra Bose suddenly visited Savarkar residence and met me. The details of that meeting though known to some of my nearest colleagues, but I am mentioning it in the open gathering for the first time purposely today. And that to on the lines of this speech briefly! Subhash babu, had come to Mumbai to primarily resolve the Hindu- Muslim issue once and for all. To speak in the language used in the newspaper at that time, he was going to outbid Gandhiji in pacifying Barrister Jinnah! 
Leaving aside the newspaper language , but he himself freely told me laughing, “ I just met Mr. Jinnah. But the funny thing is, He asked me, “Mr. Subhash babu, on whose behalf are you come to negotiate? I said, “ On behalf of Congress”! On that Jinnah said, ‘But Congress has boycotted you.’ I said, ‘But I am still the authorised leader of the Forward Block! I can speak on its behalf.’ On this Jinnah said ‘ but if you are speaking to me in the capacity of the Muslim Leader, and are asking for compromise on behalf of Hindu-Muslim, then you should speak to some representative of the Hindus. Is your Forward Block calling itself a Hindu organisation?’ “No!” I said can I not speak as a Hindu and wish to discuss compromise’ on this Jinnah said, “Then as a representative of the Hindus, you first go and meet Savarkar! He can represent Hindus. What is the point of speaking person to person? If Savarkar comes then we will discuss!’ Then I immediate came here! And saying this Subhash babu laughed out loud! He then said, ‘As it is I wanted to visit you this time.’ 
Independence is not possible without Brave efforts 
I will leave the discussion I had with Subhash Babu about the main topic of Hindu Muslim unity initiated by Subhash babu as it is irrelevant to the topic of the speech. Leaving all the subjects aside, I asked Subhash Babu the main question, “Leave all that aside! Tell me one thing, in the current world war, what is a your person like you doing in India, and leading petty movements like bringing down the statues in Calcutta and get arrested and go to prison . What is the meaning of this?” Then he replied a little sadly, “The flame of revolution should be kept burning in the hearts of the public, then what else we can do?”I said, “I know you agony.” But I asked the when the powerful tyrants like the Governor general are living 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
what is the point of bringing down the Dead Tormentors Statues, isn’t it a waste of public energy? The true politics is when you dump the enemies in the prison, not yourself”. And if a person like you is arrested then that is what the Government wants. When you were the Congress president we had a secret meeting. With the same confidence I wish to make a sincere request to you. When I am propagating militarisation you have been opposing it, as just like the other so called moderate leaders believe I am providing manpower to the British, but I will tell you the fact. I am insisting on Hindus being recruited in the army so that in the future these warfare trained men can revolt against the British and start a armed revolution to gain freedom from the British Rule. During the First World War we have formed a equality based treaty, to form a Indian army in the German Army. I told him about all the efforts we had taken during the First World War and now, as I have already mentioned in yesterday and today’s speeches. I further said, “See this fresh letter from Rasbihari Bose. From this, it can be assumed that Japan will blow the war horns within this year. If this happens then we would get the golden opportunity to attack the British from outside with the help of the German and Japanese modern weapons and the thousands of trained Indian soldiers. At such a time a leader like you, to try and get arrested purposely is a very harmful thing. Just like Rasbihari Bose and other such revolutionary leaders escaped from India and went to Japan or Germany you should also do the same. There in Italy, Germany taking any weapons you get and openly accept the leadership of the Indian army. Openly declare the Total Independence of India and as soon as Japan enters the war, with whatever possible means either through the Bay of Bengal or through Burma, attack the British rule in India from the outside. Without such a brave act, it is impossible to achieve our independence. I see two or three people capable of such bravery , one of them is you. I have high hopes from you!” 
After saying this I stopped. Subhash babu kept staring into the ground motionless deep in thought. I did not expect him to say yes or no immediately about what I had suggested. And to make him realise that I suddenly started talking about his article, My Strange Illness. But he only said, “I will first go to Calcutta and see the situation there and then decide about my future plan. If I come here, I will meet you again.” I did not ask for further explanation. Nor did he give me any. 
Within some days, Subhash babu went back to Calcutta and was arrested in the statue case, this news reached us. 
After he went to prison, all the thoughts of the statues and Hindu Muslim unity and the previous feelings were thrown out and he started thinking only about getting out of the prison and escaping to Germany – Japan. This is clear from all the published and unpublished news. He gave up food in the Prison. He accepted the insulting condition of the British government and git his freedom and before being taken to prison again, escaped from under the very nose of the British!’ 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 1. If the thought of going to the German allied British enemy nations would have struck him before he met Savarkar, he could have gathered the Indian armies from those camps. He could have easily escaped while he was free and a shrewd leader like him would not have gone to prison for a petty crime of a statue! It is hence clear that the idea to for the Indian national Army was given to Subhash Chandra Bose by Veer Savarkar. 
Hitler Mussolini Treaty 
In Germany, Subhash babu openly signed a treaty with Mussolini and declared a war against the British. Gathering the British Indian Soldiers in the prison camps of Italy and Germany how he formed a strong Revolutionary army, how he went to the Japan conquered Singapore in a Germen Submarine, How with the help of Rasbihari Bose he collected the immense armour of the British as the British soldiers had run away and formed a strong and well armed Revolutionary Army, As soon as he reached there he became the Commanding officer of that army and on the basis of the Ammunition declared the Total Independence of India and how he formed the Provisional Government and from Singapore he gave the war cry “Chalo Delhi” and via Burma came straight to Assam where the Revolutionary army kept fighting the British troops, the details of this news are known to all. 
The Freedom army got soldiers due to Militarisation 
In the meanwhile the fifty sixty thousand Indian Army that Subhash babu could form was due to the militarisation movement that was run by us , as openly admitted by Subhash babu. From The Azad Hind Radio in Singapore on June 25, 1944, the Commandering chief Subhash babu said, “ When due to misguided political whims and lack of vision almost all the leaders of the Congress party have been decrying all the soldiers in the Indian Army as mercenaries, it is heartening to know Veer Savarkar is fearlessly exhorting the youth of India to enlist in the Armed Forces. These enlisted youths themselves provide us the trained men and soldiers for our Indian national Army.”While the Revolutionary Army was attacking British from outside within India the non-violent and unarmed Congress revolted in a weapon less manner. Their slogan was Quit India but keep your army here! Even though this slogan was an excellent example of the self- contradictory. Luckily the people just heard the first half of the slogan Quit India and just understood that. And did not understand or hear the stupid and cowardly ‘keep your army here’. This Congress revolution generated a huge furore in the country. The hundreds of Patriot leaders of the Congress went to prison. We are thankful and grateful for their efforts and work. But again you all know the incident. So I don’t want to repeat it in my speech. But i would like to openly mention one thing that the so called non-violent and unarmed leaders of the Congress never published and that is, that after learning from their own experiences that just going to prison in the name of non violence and bearing the violent torture will not help achieve Independence and they joined the armed revolution. They all quickly went underground and started a furore of armed 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
attacks on the British. Finally the non violent Congress became the home for the armed revolutionaries for a short while. 
1. Recently means in August 1947, a famous Japanese Author, “Mr J G Ohsawa wrote a book, named “The Two Great Indians in Japan”. In that he wrote about the life of Rasbihari Bose and especially about his stay in Japan and a tearful report of his revolutionary work. When the Japanese forces attacked Singapore the British Indian Army fought the Japanese forces , but a battalion of the Indian National army under the command of Rasbihari Bose was fighting the British troops. The review of that Incidence in the book is briefly given below: 
....February, Japanese Attack on Singapore began.... The resistance of British Indian Forces was strong. The Imperial Guards ( The Japanese) H.Q had to encounter many difficulties. 
The chief of the Indian National Army (I.N.A.) proceeded alone to the front line and talked to the Indian officers and soldiers in the British Army not to be false to their love of India and the Independence of Indian strong heartstring words. Miracle accomplished! The shooting (on the other side of the British Indian Forces) was stopped! Savarkar’s Militarisation policy in World War II began to take shape. 
The speech was finalised, waves of cheers rose from the Indian soldiers who jumped into the Indian National Army I.N.A. (Even)The Japanese Imperial Guards were entirely stupefied!.... Fall of Singapore Surrendered British soldiers numbered some 45000 and Indians too. I.N.A absorbed these Indian soldiers and officers developed into formidable forces of 50000. 
Amongst the Indian’s newly surrendered (I.N.A) there were some 30 officers including Lt. Col. Gil. Rashbihari became supreme commandant. (Page 47-48) 
Britain ready to sign a treaty with India 
In this way while the Congress armed revolutionaries in India were creating havoc in India, on the other hand the revolutionaries’ to free India attacked in large armies from the outside, there by cornering the British, Americas’ first atomic bomb fell on Japan and Japan surrendered! There in Europe Hitler – Mussolini completely lost The Tri-nations America, Britain and France won the Second world war.! 
At least for Britain this victory was, like would have lost my head, but got off by losing the tail. Though The British Nation was saved, England has lost its empire and arrogance under the attacks of the two World wars. As regards India by the end of the World war the British conditions was such that, (1) All the Indian soldiers of the British Indian Army, Navy and Air force had already revolted against the British or were ready to revolt. (2) During the 1857 mutiny, when the Indian soldiers had revolted against the British, to finish the revolt, the British had brought in the English soldiers into India, but towards the end of the last world 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
war though Germany and Japan were destroyed, Bolshevik Russia’s victory had generated one more strong enemy for Britain; and the friendly America had a n Atom bomb, seeing which Britain was equally scared of its friend as of his enemy. It was impossible to send any English troops to India which had developed into a strong Anti – British Nation. (3) The British found it impossible to rule India depending on the Indians army and had no choice but to surrender to India. 
Hence out of choices, Britain agreed to Free India on some conditions and to leave India permanently and signed a truce with India. During The Indian Independence Act, when Churchill saddened that the British have to leave India asked a question, The Answer given by Prime Minister Atlee is as follows: 
“Britain is transferring power to India due to the fact that (1) The Indian mercenary Army is no longer loyal to Britain and (2) Britain cannot afford to have a large army to hold down India.” Britain had to leave India due to the military weakness. We have understood the importance of ‘non-violence’ and we had a ‘change of heart’, or Imperialism is unjust and hence we are leaving India ‘out of our own free will’, neither Atlee nor any other British member said so!! 
Obviously from 1906 to 1947, the armed revolt led by the revolutionary party and the mutinies in the Indian Army through militarisation and the as per the foreign politics the revolt against the British during the World wars had caused the British to finally leave the country. As told by the British Prime minister himself. 
But you sent the same weak willed representatives to sign the truce with the British and The Quit India became Split India. Hence armed revolutionaries like me were telling you that don’t choose the India National Party as your representatives; you chose the same party, and taking advantage of the political weakness The British on the condition of cutting the nation into pieces signed the power transfer treaty. 
But now what is done is done, let bygones be bygones. Let us celebrate what we have achieve in the century, We have freed at least 3⁄4 of India from the British rule. Let me repeat again so that I should not be biased, that This victory is a joint effort of all the armed revolutionary parties and all the other parties who put in as much as they could as per their ideologies. I just wanted to make the people aware of the efforts taken and the cost paid for this freedom and hence has briefly narrated the History in my speeches yesterday and today. 
Ganga and Jamuna are free but? 
By defeating the British, today we have established our Independent India a Great Country. I do not call it Great out of Pride or arrogance. India is geographically bigger than the combined area of England, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Switzerland. And 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
today it has mostly come together with one life, one soul. At the beginning of the speech I said, that when Shivaji Maharaj freed the area between Godavari to Krushna and established an Independent India, even Samarth Ramdas a seer could not control his joy! Then today when we have united Setu Rameshwar to Haridwar, our fatherland and our sacred land together. 
We have bound all the ancient capitals of dynasty like Chel Chola, Pandya Chandragupta’s Patliputra, Vikram’s Devgiri, Harihar Bukka’s Vijaynagar, and brought them under one roof and just like the Pandavas establish their Indraprastha we have again established our Hindu Prastha!! And have unfurled the Flag on the great nation with a Sudarshan Chakra on it. 
All the Religious places, that we have to remember every day as part of our religious duty,like, Ayodhya, Mathura, Maya, Kashi, Kanchi, Avaantika, Puri, Dwaravati to Jagannnath Puri and from Madurai’ s Meenakshi to Kamrup’s Kamakshi all are free, and independent today. Along with this the one shloka that reminds us of our national unity “Gangescha Yamunechaiva Godavari, Saraswati, Narmada, Sindhu, Kaveri Jalehsmin Snnigdham Kuru” These sacred rivers of ours are also free and purified today. – 
But the pious of pious river the Sindhu is still not a part of this great Nation! The Sindhu is still alien to us. 
What are you saying? Now forget about Sindhu! Skip her name from that shloka. And now say this bath mantra half only. Otherwise these Tom Dick and Harry will get angry on me, and start hating me! Hence forget about Sindhu! 
No No!! Even if the whole world starts hating us, we will not forget the Sindhu, We cannot break , forget or leave our Sindhu. Hindu without Sindhu! is like word without meaning! As long as we have air flowing through our lungs it is Impossible! Impossible! Impossible! As long as there is atleast one hindu alive we can never forget the Sindhu! 
Sindhu hymns! 
On The banks of whom our ancient Seers sang their first prayers and on the banks of whom they said their evening prayers, and in respect of whom hundred of hymns are written, “O Ambitme, Naditme, Devitme, Sindhu we will never forget you! The Havans done on your banks pleased the Gods and the sweet smell of the offerings pleased them. Drink of your water quenched the thirst of the Gods and the God of Gods, O Sindhu We will not forget you! 
Maharashtra thirsty for the water of Sindhu 
Even then Maharashtra is pining for you. Long ago once when you had separated from us in this way, the Maharashtra army marched ahead towards the north to free you from foreign 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
bounds. Because our Shivaji Maharaj regretted till his last breath that he had captured the Southern point but could not conquer the northern point. This unfulfilled wish was fulfilled by the Bajirao Peshwa, because the thirst of his horses was not quenched by just drinking the water from the Chambal and hence in order to burn the Moghuls beard he headed to Delhi. His horses crossed Yamuna, Ganaga , Satlaj, Jhelum but still their thirst was not quenched but finally when they reached your banks and drank you water to their hearts content they were pleased. Everyone else may forget you , but our Maharashtra alone will never forget you! 
As Veer Savarkar ended his speech, he stirred storms of emotions in the thousands of listeners and the started shouting “Veer Savarkar ki Jai” “Swatantrya Lakshmi ki Jai” “Victory to the Revolutionaries”!! 
(4) End of the Closing Ceremony 
On the 12th May 1952, ceremony came to a close with the following speech by Veer Savarkar: 
“ For the past two days you are celebrating this grand festival of paying our homage to the late revolutionary Martyrs and Brave souls and the dissolving of the “Abhinav Bharat” full of enthusiasm and I would like to thank the reception committee establish in Pune and the citizens of Pune from the bottom of my heart. However out of the functions of past two days today’s function on this third day has a different agenda and importance. The Pune Municipal Corporation, which is a part of the Government system, and such a authorised and representative organisation has not only decide to honour the late revolutionaries, but also those revolutionaries, who have the pleasure of witnessing this Golden day of Independence, and therefore has doubled the importance of the day. 
The organisation committee had initially decided that only the late revolutionaries would be paid homage to in this ceremony. Accordingly the homage was paid yesterday. I have told the reason behind this on the first day in my speech that to organise this festival, the present revolutionaries like me had to take an initiative. Hence, to congratulate ourselves and sing our own praises we have organised this function. And as we did not want any crooked minded person to even doubt that is was not to erase the false history and write the true history, we decide we would not honour any living revolutionary at all. However, a lot of people are still unaware of the history of the armed revolutionary party and there are chances of them misunderstanding that they would think the living revolutionaries are not worth honouring, and hence today’s’ function. I would like to comment on these living revolutionaries a bit to indicate how apt this decision was. 
We were not scared of death, Death was scared of us 
There is only one difference between the late revolutionaries and the living revolutionaries. Simple Coincidence! While fighting an armed combat with the British for the freedom of our 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
motherland some of the revolutionaries laid down their lives , while some though fighting till the last moment coincidentally did not die. Of those revolutionaries who are living today, if not specifically but classifiably most of them have faced immense hardships, pain , torture, kalapani, imprisonment, gunshots, and all such perils with immense and unrelenting courage and patience as is clear from the brief description that I gave in my speech yesterday. While the revolting against the British some revolutionaries went on trial and were sentenced to death and we are honouring them as martyrs but, sometimes in the same trial the main planner of that plot, under whose inspiration the hanged revolutionary gained the glow of being a martyr, was released and is alive. Khudiram, Kanaihyalal Dutt, were hanged and became martyrs, but their revolutionary guru Mr Aurobindo Ghosh was coincidently released as innocent was alive till the end of the freedom struggle! It is perhaps an coincidence to die in a war. Some warriors die immediately are the first round of bullets is fired, and some miss those bullets and though create trouble of their enemy survive the war and go an to fight many such wars. But both these late and living braves are equally honourable. While capturing Sinhagad, Tanaji died, but Suryaji who fought alongside him and who gathered the Maratha forces again and won Sinhagad lived to see the victory. Hence the capability of the warriors is not dependant on who lived and who died in a war, it depends on who kept fighting till his last breath or till victory was achieved. 
The same rule is applicable to the armed revolutionaries both living and dead fighting in the war of independence against the British. Of all the brave revolutionaries alive today, right from those who from the beginning of the century were part of the Abhinav Bharat to the soldier fighting in Subhash Chandra Bose’s I.N. A all are alive by coincidence! Just because they did not die in the war! Today, out of us living revolutionaries many have themselves gone ahead and shaken the gallows at least thrice , but even then we are alive is not because we were scared of death! but because death was scared of us! Hence it is just that we paid our homage yesterday to the late revolutionaries and today the organisation committee and the Pune Municipal Corporation honoured the living one today. In whole of India, Pune is the first place to honour the armed revolutionaries in such a huge proportion and pay their respects to them! Similarly the first representative organisation that came forward to honour such brave men was also the Pune Municipal Corporation. You are privileged have gained great honour, in following the tradition and greatness of Pune. 
The biggest enemy of our Freedom is Terrorism! 
As soon as this revolution is over, and we have established our independence, our first national duty is to bury the anti-national trends and means that we ourselves have spread all over the country during the revolution and establish law and order in the country. To counter defeat, secret plots, armed mutinies, terrorism, breaking the law, anti- enemy behaviour is acceptable, and necessary! But as soon as we gain victory, such behaviour should be condemned and the means thrown away; else they become a bigger enemy of the nation than the outside forces. This situation was recognised by the revolutionaries at the time of the revolution itself and discussed in detail in Abhinav Bharat and London’s Free India Society. The revolutionaries were warned about it. Luckily we have some evidence of this revolutionary fact even today. My English book written in 1908-09, War of Indian 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
Independence 185, is now openly published. In that I have discussed this point and supported it from time to time, and also an appeal to the Indian princes to join the revolutionary party, a small booklet i had published in London ‘Choose, Oh Indian Princes!’ that had gained a lot of fame at that time, though not fully but a passage on the above topic is still available to us today! Obviously the credit for the availability of that passage goes to our opponent, the author of Unrest of India, Valentine Chirol! The documentary evidence is proof of the fact that even during the revolution period we were planning about the basic principles and means on which the Independence should be based and were sharing this information with our revolutionary ranks. As soon as we gained independence we should give up the revolutionary motto and take up the following motto and engrave it on our hearts that, Constitution within- Revolution outside! Law within – Sword outside! Peace within- War outside! 
Just because we establish Swaraj, we can’t establish Ram Raj from the first day! 
When any country is freed from foreign rule, this means that while under the foreign rule, the molestation that the foreign ruler has handed out to him, the slavish attitude nurtured in him,; rape, torture, meted out daily leaving him in shambles; famines, poverty, helplessness that has been running havoc; that state is continued on the first day of the Independence. No matter which party is in rule on the first day, but that party has to face this havoc and poor conditions as soon as they take over the governance and cannot eradicate it in one day using a magic wand. At such a time, it is our national duty, to bear with them and give the new government enough time to take control of the situation and help them in whatever way possible to pacify the situation. Today the government is in the hands of the Congress, every where there is a shout, that they are making 100 mistakes. But you should bear inmind that in the past so many election, you have elected the Congress as your representatives and kept on saying they are making mistakes, Then why again like a bull tied to the oilrig you again go ahead and elect them. They have not forcefully taken the power from you. If they are making mistakes now, most of the fault lies with the people. At this point it should be clearly said, that if the Congress would not have been handed over the reigns of the government with a majority vote at the time of the Independence any other party be it the Socialist, Communist or Hindutva Party, they too would have made the same mistakes due to inexperience or power hunger, as no matter which party it is the members of that party come from the same social backgrounds. Just as all the pots filled from the same lake will have the same water, similarly the people of the same country will have the same qualities in some or the other varying proportions. Hence it is not right to immediately get angry and take it personally when some such mistakes are made and some torture extended. As for me you all know what torture I had to face from the British, but what gave me more mental agony was the imprisonment that I had to face post independence. Even then I did not utter a single word against the government. That also for the above reasons. 
But Defeat means Actual National Death! 
But even though today the torture and anti- national acts are meted out buy our own Government is true, it would not be right to get angry immediately, as I have said before, 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
but when I see that the public unable to bear the extremities reacting saying, “what freedom is this? The British rule was better or The Russian rule would be better:” I feel a chill done my spine. Because this is a traitor attitude! This attitude put our motherland through the British rule in the past. As I had said before that there is no greater enemy of our Independence that Unruliness. Ina way we can accept the unruly Governance of our own people, but the foreign rule of the British, Russia or even the Messengers of God is not acceptable. The Internal unruliness of a nation is a terrible disease. It may be painful but may not be incurable. But foreign governance is the death of the nation itself. This feeling should be engraved on our people’s heart and flow in their vein like blood. In any type of Government, there will be differences of opinion amongst the parties as well as individuals about what is good for the nation. There is no harm in that. In fact, if these differences are unselfish and inspired by national well being, they are always beneficial. But after establishing independence however strong the differences are they should fit into the ballot boxes only! Just be sure if the base of the ballot box is open or not! This responsibility lies with the People. But also on the party who has been constitutionally elected, the responsibility lies with them too. Today it is Congress rule. Such a language is used everywhere in the Newspapers, but this small sentence shows the lack of awareness in the minds of the people as well as the Government officials, and that fuel and poison the National Mentality . It’s not Congress Rule. It’s our rule. Just the operations are handled by the Congress today. This feeling should be clearly emphasised and expressed. Today the operations are with Congress tomorrow some other party may be elected with a majority, as it is the Rule of the Nation! Hence if we do not want terrorism to rule over us again, then any election should be conducted in a constitutional manner, impartially and without a touch of dishonesty and this responsibility lies with the ruling party. But if their people itself start cracking the ballot boxes or if there are unconstitutional change made in personal or for power greed purposes to the constitution itself then the public anger will set that very constitution on fire. The then ruling party will be responsible for committing the sin of inviting unruliness into the Country. 
Not ‘Opposition’ but ‘Minority’ Party The Word that we borrowed from The British Parliament “opposition Party” is worth disowning. The Parties other than the one in rule are together known as the opposition party in the British Parliament. But due to the long history of democracy in England the British know the correct usage of the word opposition. So that party does not oppose any such thing that is beneficial for the nation as a whole. They behave with mutual consent. But for us Democracy is a new thing. Therefore the word opposition is taken literally and it is meant that the party that is against the ruling party. And hence to make away with this misconception we should disown the word opposition party and instead use minority party. Wherein it would denote the parties that have lesser votes than the ruling party and would also not encourage the bad habit of opposing everything that the ruling party proposes and would promote a mutually understanding. The two parties may be known as government and non government parties but the most appropriate name would be Majority party and Minority party. The main responsibility of the Minority party is to ensure that he majority party does not do anything that is not in the wellbeing of our nation and support the majority party in anything that is beneficial to the nation wholeheartedly.”Then veer Savarkar 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
spoke about his discussions with his colleagues on how the Constitution on the Independent India be like? And as a lot of the revolutionary members were Barristers and ICS they had to study the Constitutional law, the Constitutions of various nations and the historic conditions in which they are set. And how he gave speeches on the conditions that we would have to set our constitution after overturning the rule of the British at the Free India Society. Then he further said: 
Indian young men, Now we first need an Army 
After accomplishing the impossible task of freeing the Country from the clutches a strong nation like Britain, we have given the reign of this Independent India into your hands. To protect the National Independence is now your responsibility. Now that you have erected this memorial pillar in the honour of the armed Revolutionaries who have made unlimited sacrifices, acts of valour, and have laid down their lives while killing the enemy, keep their example in front of you and taking inspiration from them follow their footsteps and enter the line of duty, you will definitely be able to protect the nation from all the enemies. Because your young generation is the generation of the sons or grandsons of the freedom fighters. The blood that flows in your veins is the same that flowed in the veins of the Independence establishers, brave, passing generation. The ambers of this blood and its glow will catch fire with just a blow of wind. If you show the same valour you will suit to be their sons and rightful heir. Hence do not assume that you have got independence just to enjoy it but it is your responsibility to guard it as well and make this nation hundred times stronger. You will have to make ten times more sacrifices, take hardships and do brave acts for at least the next ten years, than you previous generation. 
Now this newly established freedom needs one thing the most, at the beginning, in the middle and at the end and that is a strong Army. 
Remember that today’s humanity is standing on the level of Nationalism and Militarism. The nations that are free on their own military power are the truly free nations. And the other weaker nations are struggling to carve a niche on the map. It is the fact that without being lost in the opium induced dream world if you want to survive amongst the strong and aggressive nations you have to stop running under the banner of non- violent peace and immediately start building an army as strong as any other nation to live a long Independent life. After independence, the party that has been handed the reign of the government has not taken even the first step towards building an army after four years now. This is an unforgivable mistake. Some great leaders amongst them are still making large declarations, Since we don’t want to attack anyone, none will attack us. Hence we will not do the irrational sin of building and army! 
Due to such weak attitude, our nation had to face unlimited harm for many centuries. Just as ridiculous it is, the sheep and goats telling the foxes, that at no point in time do we wish to attack you, similarly it is when we tell strong nations like America, Britain and Russia who have atom bombs in their armour, that as today we don’t have enough revolvers even, and 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
say India never wishes to attack you! As assuming that since we promise them they will also promise us not to attack us is the heights of Stupidity! Some ruling party leaders and their followers in order to prove that militarisation is bad and self- destructive are preaching around, see what happens with militarisation? That Hitler, Mussolini, and that Japan’s Tojo they sided militarisation and see how that destroyed them and their nations. It is true that Hitler, Mussolini and too are destroyed, But who destroyed them and how? America, Britain and Russia did not throw millions of bible teachings and the non – violent Buddhist teachings on Japan and destroy them, they threw an atom bomb. A military power hundred times stronger than Japan and Germany destroyed them. One times military power cannot be defeated by non-violence but can be defeated with 1.25 times the military power. At least that is the lesson that Hitler, Mussolini and Tojo’s destruction taught us. That is the reason, that after the Soviet national revolution victory the practical rulers first started building a strong, modern and well equipped Red army and maintaining it. Then they started building factories, schools and agriculture industries as their secondary 5-year plans! 
Because even if you building factories, schools and agriculture industries across the countries, how are you going to protect all these from the attack of your strong enemies like Britain, America And Russia without a the army, navy and air force of your military. As is experienced by India that just as a single glittering gold ornament is an inspiration enough for a thief to rob you ; similarly nations unsecured wealth is an inspiration enough for any strong nation to attack you. Even then India’s eyes did not open. But Russia did not make that mistake. It became a super power by preparing a equally strong ammunition to counter attack the secretly build atom bomb present in the American Armour! 
Which Country becomes a “Big” Nation? 
We ourselves print in our papers every day. Three big nations meeting! The big nations say this and the big nations say that! But it does not even occur to us to discuss how did these nations become big? Why America, Russia and Britain are called the Three Big Nations by the world and why don’t they call India a Big Nation? 
Are these three nations big as regards their religious sector or Knowledge perspective? No, these three nations are big only in one thing, their Military sector! Because they have most dreadful of Nuclear weapons, chemical weapons and biological weapons! Hence these three nations are big! And all others small! Anything these three nations say is final! 
Under such circumstances it is impossible that we can feign hollow indifference and say we are neutral without having at least the equal amount of firepower in out armour. While or secret enemies have hovering over our heads and toes and intend to bite of our flesh, who will let us stay neutral? If sparrows declare themselves neutral will the hawks stop pouncing on them! That is not possible! The Ruling Government should take up arms in huge proportions to guard our national Independence. This is their first duty. Just like it is mandatory in other countries that all men old and young should go through military training, it should be made mandatory here as well. All the young children from schools, colleges and 
www.savarkarsmarak.com universities should be trained in warfare and within the next five years we should at least have one crore young soldiers altogether in our army , navy and air force ready to fight for the nation. We should invent much stronger counter weapons to all the known weapon existent in the world and should set up hundred of ammunition factories in India, in the next five years India shouls not only be able but the most strong and capable nation in the world. 
After you have become so strong, then if you wish you may tell the world that we will not attack you, or we will remain neutral. Then those words will have some meaning. Today these word from a weak nations mouth are meaningless and ridiculous. They are also a display of your weakness of our nation. 
Oh Indian Youth! As I said before, now the responsibility of this nation is on your shoulders, So first set up a string military and then through the ballot boxes throw off this coward, short- sighted and inexcusable Government and take up governance in your own hands and establish a victorious and brave Government. 
The pillar that you have erected in the honour of the late revolutionaries is strongly and firmly orders you to pull up your socks and take on the responsibility! 
An Appeal and Challenge to the Princes of India. 
Oh Princes of the Indian States! Once India becomes Independent, its governing policies will be decided by the constitution and no one else. The Indian Constitution will be the only one followed and no other Constitution will be considered legitimate or legal. ... Whether the Indian republic Nations head will be a president or a King will be decided by the Constitution. Whether it will follow a democratic rule or will accept a monarchy will be its own decision. In this current situation either the princes should surrender their titles and themselves or stay out and be neutral. Oh Indian princes please do not forget, that an detail investigation will be conducted as to what you have done and what you have avoided doing. The New born India will not deter from behaving with you in a tit for tat manner. Every prince who has deceived his subjects, maligned his father’s name and has spoilt blood in his head will be destroyed. In the name of the dead revolutionaries we are warning you to think sincerely and deeply about this. Do you want to the first fathers of this nation or the last tyrant the decision is in your own hands? The labour pains of this revolution to give birth to the independent India are just starting and already strongest of the strong nations are trembling in fear! Under these circumstances is it not as impossible as reversing the rules of gravity that you weak people should try to commit infanticide by strangulating the new born baby of Indian Independence? 
(5) Then establishing independence, now protecting independence. 
The known and Unknown Late revolutionaries, who laid down their lives in the War for Indian Independence were paid homage to on May 10 in Pune, On this occasion a special 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
edition is being released by Kesari . Some other newspaper would also be paying their respects through such articles and editions. Just like the Shraddh this public homage of the great late freedom fighters is a religious as well as out National duty. 
One Restriction 
Just as the revolutionary period had become an history. That means that while looking at late revolutionaries monumental pillar and reading about the past the current generation should observe on restriction. What is that and how it should be observed is being given in this article below: 
The british only with their military power suppressed us and enslaved us for over a decade. I order to free our country from their clutches; the first armed revolution began on the 10 March 1857, with the bullet fired at a English officer by Mangal Pandey. That revolt was broken. But the tradition was not broken, just as if one blast of the volcano cools down , the volcano keeps erupting, its lava keeps boiling underground , and they again erupt. Same is the case with our eternal animosity with the British. The secular total Independence was those revolutionaries’ motto1 to say in their words: 
A poisonous snake has come to sting or motherland! Suddenly, cornering him, instigating him, beating him, we will smash him! 
This was the motto of those revolutionaries! Hence, however possible,, wherever possible and whenever possible these revolutionaries corners, attacked, in the country or abroad, individually or in groups, secretly or openly engaged the British in armed Combat and also killed the very symbols of British empire in India the Governors, Governor generals, Collectors and British Officer in India and also in London. The world itself started calling this a revenge of the fact that the British had snatched India’s freedom on military power and the Indian retaliated with an armed revolt. 
While the armed revolt continued on one end the patriots who could not digest or appreciate violence started their non-violent movements causing extreme dislike for the foreign rule in the minds of the common people. The armed revolutionaries wanted that, because seeing that the non-violent agitations are not paid any heed to by the British the common people would get attracted to the armed revolt. As it is the only high place from where we could proudly and loudly declare that this animosity with the British will not end was the gallows!! That is why these revolutionaries kept moving towards the gallows one by one. They did not let the nation forget about the aim of National Independence! The gallows kept dripping with their blood for over 90 years. 
Continuous- warm – blood stream, Held by generation after generations The sacrificial war pits Fire is intense and never let to die|| 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
As soon as they got enough strength the openly entered into a war. They looted the British treasure, British Governments Armouries. 
The first Independent Governance 
‘An Enemies enemy is our temporary friend’ following this policy they started forming friendship with the strong nations in Europe that were enemies of Britain; many took modern warfare training in Europe and America. As soon as the First World War broke out, the revolutionaries openly sided Germany. In Berlin they established the first provisional Government of Independent India and gained the approval and acceptance of the German Allied countries. They formed the first Indian Army of Independent Indian Army, and prepared to attack The British government in India. But just then Germany was defeated; and the revolutionaries spread out to different countries, but they did not lose hope, they kept revolting against the British in those countries. Then they got the opportunity of the Second World War. The British needed lakhs of Indian Soldiers, then in the name of militarisation lakhs of Indian young men joined the army. And under various names the revolutionaries entered the army. There they dug deep into the British Indian Army’s loyalty to the British and under the slogan of Chalo Dilli! And united under the banner of the Indian National Army attacked India from Assam. At the same time they non-violent groups in India started their agitation in India. Just then with America throwing atom bombs on Japan and the British allies were victorious in the Second World War. But at home in India the British we stuck in a dilemma, they could not control the rampant India just on the Military power anymore. The British army was not enough for guarding Britain itself, it was impossible for them to hold down India. 
The Army Revolts. 
The British Indian Army on whose strength the British could hold down India, navy and the Army had now revolted against the British! They had no option but to leave India i f they wanted to survive. Hence just while running away whatever little damage they could do just as Napoleon’s army went running stumbling and falling all over themselves notwithstanding the Indian resistance, The British left India In 1947. In our ancient Indraprastha we have again established our Free Independent India!! And have unfurled the Flag on the great nation with a Sudarshan Chakra on it once again today! 
Just like you can’t have you whole meal in one bite, No revolution of such huge proportion is 100% successful in one attempt. Hence if there are some discrepancies left, some wounded unhealed, so destroyed area, we still have been successful in getting 3⁄4 of our continuous land under one roof, one flag and under one Nation. It is not a insignificant thing. It is one of the great revolutions in the world. If we can just gather all this strength quickly and spread a sensation of bravado, just by the mere clinging of the swords all these small-small issues will vanish. At some point of time Samarth Has indicated, “First nurture what you have got” and the on its strength “you can get More!” 
www.savarkarsmarak.com 
The Credit of this successful Revolution is United! 
It is a irreversible fact that the credit of this success is to all those who with whatever means contributed to the revolution, be it armed, non- violent, Individual in groups, or even those who could not join the struggle directly but kept praying for its success in the hearts. 
For the Non-Violent Movements, our nation has been paying homage to them since the British rule to date. There grateful appreciation has been rightly done from time to time even today. 
Since the armed revolutionaries who blew the war horns in the middle of the night and fought with their lives by making the first attack of the sword on the British Empire, those revolutionaries could not be appreciated during the British rule. Post independence, Pune is the first place to honour the armed revolutionaries in such a huge proportion and pay their respects to them!. Pune is privileged and has gained great honour, in following the tradition and greatness of Pune. 
The last duty of the Successful National Revolution is Self-Immersion. 
As long as the war of independence was going on all the terrorist activities of sabotaging the Government Machinery and killing the government officials, looting and damaging government property etc was justified. That was our religion. But now the war is over and we are victorious, now we need to stop these activities and eradicate them from our country. If these methods are allowed to be around they would turn on us one day and create a bigger problem for us. Hence our first duty after establishing independence is immersion of all these trends of armed or un armed revolution an spread the word of law and order amongst the people. As now our aim has changed from getting independence to protecting Independence, National Development. Now we will follow Lawfulness rather than Unruliness. Not Destructive but Constructive behaviour, this is our National religion now. 
The principles of Unruliness, non cooperation and destruction that we followed against the British should be immediately changed to Law abiding, Cooperative and Constructive. This responsibility lies not only with the people but ten times more with the ruling party. Whether the Govenment or the governed all of us should behave in a Legal, Legitimate and Constitutional manner only. I can vouch on behalf of all my colleagues that this has been our ideology right from the time that We started this revolution, that once the country is free, Independence established and constitution set up, we would immediately dissolve the revolutionary party that were formed at the time of the British. For this purpose only and to emphasise on this point itself we have organised this Closing ceremony of one of the many Secret organisations the Abhinav Bharat and on behalf of the revolutionaries perform this final duty towards the National revolution! 
- Kesari, Date 11 May 1952. 
www.savarkarsmarak.com