 INDIAN WAR OF 
INDEPENDENCE 1857 
PART-I The Volcano 
© Himani Savarkar, Savarkar Bhavan, Raja Thakur Path, Shanivar Peth, Pune. tel :+912025544751 Internet Rights are with Swatantryaveer Savarkar Rashtriya Smarak Trust, Dadar, Mumbai INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
PART-I 
The Volcano 
CHAPTER-I SWADHARMA & SWARAJ 
It is a simple truism patent even to the uneducated that the most tiny house cannot be built without a foundation strong enough to support its weight. When writers who profess to write the history of the Revolution that was enacted in India in 1857 ignore this common sense principle and do not try to discuss the real causes that led to it and impudently maintain that the vast edifice of the Revolution was built on a blade of straw, they must either be fools or, what is more probable, knaves. Anyway, it is certain that they are unfit for the holy work of the historian. 
In all great religious and political revolutions, it is almost impossible to connect together links apparently inconsistent, without thoroughly understanding the principles which are at their root. On seeing a great work of machinery composed of innumerable screws and wheels doing work of tremendous magnitude if we do not understand how the power is produced, we may feel bewildering astonishment, but never the inner pleasure due to knowledge. When writers describe such stirring events as the French Revolution or the religious revolution of Holland, the very splendour and magnitude of the crises they paint, often, dazzle and confuse their mind's eye and they rarely gather sufficient coolness and courage to go deep into the underlying principles. But without an exposition of the hidden causes and the mysterious forces that worked beneath, the essence of a revolution can never be made plain. And therefore it is that history attaches more importance to the exposition of principles than to mere narrative. 
While searching after principles, historians often commit another mistake. For every act, there are various causes, direct and indirect, general and particular, accidental and necessary. In their proper classification lies the true skill of the historian. In this process of classification many historians get mixed up and make the accidental into a 
necessary cause. These make themselves as ridiculous as the judge in the story who, in a case of arson, put all the responsibility on the match instead of the man who struck it. The real importance of any event can never be understood by this confusion of causes. Not merely that, but mankind begins positively to curse the memory of men who are represented as having started, with a light heart and private selfish motives, a Revolution in the course of which countless lives are lost and immense expanses of country devastated. And therefore, in writing the history of any event in general, and of revolutionary movements in particular, a writer cannot give a true idea of them by means of simple description, or even by tracing them backwards to accidental causes. An upright and impartial historian must try to discover the foundations on which the revolutionary structure was erected. He must try to discover and discuss fundamental causes. 
Mazzini, in a critical article on Carlyle's French Revolution, has said that every revolution must have had a fundamental principle. Revolution is a complete rearrangement in the life of historic man. A revolutionary movement cannot be based on a flimsy and momentary grievance. It is always due to some all-moving principle for which hundreds and thousands of men fight, before which thrones totter, crowns are destroyed and created, existing ideals are shattered and new ideals break forth, and for the sake of which vast masses of people think lightly of shedding sacred human blood. The moving spirits of revolutions are deemed holy or unholy in proportion as the principle underlying them is beneficial or wicked. As in private life, so also in history, the deeds of an individual or a nation are judged by the character of the motive. If we forget this test, we cannot appreciate the vast difference between the empire-building wars of Alexander the Great and Italy's fight for liberty under Garibaldi. Just as to decide about the merits of these two different events one has to consider the prime motive of the chief actors in those wars, so also to write a full history of a revolution means necessarily the tracing of all the events of that revolution back to their source, - the motive, the innermost desire to those who brought it about. This is the telescope which will show clearly the lights and shadows obscured by the blurred presentation of partial and prejudiced historians. When a beginning is made in this manner, order appears in the apprent chaos of inconsistent facts, crooked lines become straight, and straight lines appear crooked, light appears where darkness is, and darkness 
spreads over light, what appeared ugly becomes fair and what looked beautiful is seen to be deformed. And expectedly, or unexpectedly, but in a clear form, the Revolution comes into the light of real history. 
The history of the tremendous Revolution that was enacted in India in the year 1857 has never been written in this scientific spirit by any author, Indian or foreign. And hence there are current throughout the world most extraordinary, misleading, and unjust ideas about that Revolutionary War. English authors have committed, in this respect, all the faults noted above. Some of them have not made any attempt beyond merely describing the events, but most of them have written the history in a wicked and partial spirit. Their prejudiced eye could not or would not see the root principle of that Revolution. Is it possible, can any sane man maintain, that that all- embracing Revolution could have taken place without a principle to move it ? Could that vast tidal wave from Peshawar to Calcutta have risen in flood without a fixed intention of drowning something by means of its force ? Could it be possible that the sieges of Delhi, the massacres of Cawnpore, the banner of the Empire, heroes dying for it, could it ever be possible that such noble and inspiring deeds have happened without a noble and inspiring end ? Even a small village market does not take place without an end, a motive; how, then, can we believe that that great market opened and closed without any purpose- the great market whose shops were on every battle field from Peshawar to Calcutta, where kingdoms and empires were being exchanged, and where the only current coin was blood ? No, no. The market was neither opened nor closed without a purpose. English historians have always ignored this point, not because it is difficult to ascertain it, but because it is against their interests to admit the truth. 
Even more deceptive than this indifference, and one which changes or distorts the whole spirit of the Revolution of 1857 is the other device of English historians copied by their Indian sycophants,- the device, namely, of describing the rumour as to the greased cartridges as the moving cause of the Revolution. An Indian writer drawing inspiration from English history and English1 money says, "Foolish people went mad simply at the rumour that cartridges were greased with cows' and pigs' fat. Did anyone 
1 çÆMçHçç3ççb®çí yçb[ õ çÆJçvçç3çkçÀ kçÀçíb[oíJç DççíkçÀ 
inquire as to whether the report was true? One man said and another believed; because the second became disaffected, a third joined him, and so like a procession of blind men, a company of inconsiderate fools arose, and rebellion broke out." We propose to discuss later on whether people blindly believed the rumour about cartridges. But it will be plain to anyone who has read even the English historians closely and thought about the matter, that a great attempt has been made to father all the responsibility of the Revolution on this rumour. It isnot surprising that to one, who thinks that a mighty rising like that of '57 can be produced by such trifles, it was only ' a company of inconsiderate fools.' If the Revolution had been due only to the cartridges, why did Nana Sahib, the Emperor of Delhi, the Queen of Jhansi, and Khan Bahadur Khan of Rohilkhand join it ? These were not surely going to serve in the English army, nor were they compelled to break the cartridges with their teeth ! If the rising were due wholly or chiefly to the cartridges, it would have stopped suddenly as soon as the English Governor-General issued a proclamation that they should not be used any more ! He gave them permission to make cartridges with their own hand, But instead of doing so, or ending the whole by leaving the Company's service altogether, the sepoys rose to fight in battle. Not only the sepoys but thousands of peaceful citizens and Rajas and Maharajas also rose, who had no direct or indirect connection with the army. It is therefore clear that if was not these accidental things that roused the spirit of the sepoy and the civilian, kind and pauper, Hindu and Mahommedan. Equally misleading is the theory that the rising was due to the annexation of Oudh. How many were fighting, taking their lives in their hands, that had no interest whatsoever in the fortunes of the Oudh dynasty? Then, what was their motive in fighting? The Nabob of Oudh himself was imprisoned in the fort of Calcutta; and according to the English historians, his subjects were very much disaffected under his regime. Then, why did Talukdars, soldiers, and almost every one of his subjects unsheath their swords for him ? A 'Hindu' of Bengal wrote an essay in England at that time about the Revolution. In it the 'Hindu' says, 'You have no idea how many simple and kind-hearted people who had never seen the Nabob, nor were ever again likely to see, wept in their huts when the sorrows of the Nabob were being related before them. And you do not also know how many soldiers were daily taking an oath, after the tears had flown, to avenge this 
insult on Wajid Ali Shah, as if a calamity had falle on themselves in person.' Why did the Sepoy feel this sympathy with the Nabob and why did eyes which had never seen the Nabob glisten with tears? It is plain, therefore, that the Revolution did not break out simply on account of the annexation of Oudh. 
The fear of greased cartridges and the annexation of Oudh were only temporary and accidental causes. To turn these into real causes would never help us in understanding the real spirit of the Revolution. If we were to take them as the real moving causes, it would mean that, without these, the Revolution would not have taken placed- that without the rumour of greased cartridges and without the annexation of Outh, the Revolution would not have been there. It would be impossible to find a theory more foolish and more deceptive. If there had been no fear of the cartridges, the principle underlying that fear would have cropped up in some other form and produced a Revolution just the same. Even if Oudh had not been annexed, the principle of annexation would have manifested itself in the destruction of some other kingdom. The real causes of the French Revolution were not simply the high prices of grain, the Bastille, the King's leaving Paris, or the feasts. These might explain some incidents of the Revolution but not the Revolution as a whole. The kidnapping of Sita was only the incidental cause of the fight between Rama and Ravana. The real causes were deeper and more inward. What, then, were the real causes and motives of this Revolution ? What were they that they could make thousands of heroes unsheath their swords and flash them on the battlefield? What were they that they had the power to brighten up pale and rusty crowns and raise from the dust abased flags ? What were they that for them men by the thousand willingly poured their blood year after year ? What were they that Moulvies preached them, learned Brahmins blessed them, that for their success prayers went up to Heaven from the mosques of Delhi and the temples of Benares ? 
These great principles were Swadharma and Swaraj. In the thundering roar of 'Din, Din,' which rose to protect religion, when there were evident signs of a cunning, dangerous, and destructive attack on religion dearer than life, and in the terrific blows dealt at the chain of slavery with the holy desire of acquiring Swaraj, when it was evident that chains of political slavery had been put round them and their God-given liberty 
wrested away by subtle tricks- in these two, lies the root-principle of the Revolutionary War. In what other history is the principle of love of one's religion and love of one's country manifested more nobly than in ours? However much foreign and partial historians might have tried to paint our glorious land in dark colours, so long as the name of Chitore has not been erased from the pages of our history, so long as the names of Pratapaditya and Guru Govind Singh are there, so long the principles of Swadharma and Swaraj will be embedded in the bone and marrow of all the sons of Hindusthan ! They might be darkened for a time by the mist of slavery - even the sun has its clouds - but very soon the strong light of these self-same principles pierces through the mist and chases it away. Never before were there such a number of causes for the universal spreading of these traditional and noble principles as there were in 1857. These particular reasons revived most wonderfully the slightly unconscious feelings of Hindusthan, and the people began to prepare for the right for Swadharma and Swaraj. In his Proclamation of the establishment of Swaraj, the Emperor of Delhi says, 'Oh, you sons of Hindusthan, if 
we make up our mind we can destroy the enemy in no time ! We will destroy the enemy and will release from dread our religion and our country, dearer to us than life itself2. What is holier in this world than such a Revolutionary War, a war for the noble principles propounded in this sentence, 'release from dead our religion and our country, dearer to us than life itself? The seed of the Revolution of 1857 is in this holy and inspiring idea, clear and explicit, propounded from the throne of Delhi, THE PROTECTION OF RELIGION AND COUNTRY. In the Proclamation issued at Bareilly, he says "Hindus and Mahomedans of India! Arise ! Brethren, arise ! Of all the gifts of God, the most gracious is that of Swaraj. Will the oppressive Demon who has robbed us of it b y deceit be able to keep it away from us for ever? Can such an act against the will of God stand for ever? No, no. The English have committed so many atrocities that the cup of their sins is already full. To add to it they have got now the wicked desire to destroy our holy religion ! Are you going to remain idle even now? God does not wish that you should remain so; for he has inspired in the 
2 Leckey's Fictitious Exposed and Urdu works 
hearts of Hindus and Mahomedans the desire to turn the English out of our country. And by the grace of God, and your valour, they will soon be so completely defeated that in this our Hindusthan there will not remain even the least trace of them ! In this our army, the differences of smal and great shall be forgotten, and equality shall be the rule; for, all who draw the sword in this holy war for the defence of religion are equally glorious. They are brethren, there is no rank among them. Therefore, I again say to all my Hindi brethren, 'Arise and jump into battlefield for this divinely ordained and supreme duty! " The man who, after seeing such magnificent utterances by the Revolutionary leaders, does not understand its principles is, as we said, either a fool or a knave. What stronger evidence is needed to prove that Indian warriors drew their swords at the time for Swardharma and Swaraj, feeling it the duty of every man to fight for the rights given to man by God ? These Proclamations issued at different times and placed during the war make it unnecessary to dilate more on its principles. These Proclamations were not issued by nonentities; but they were orders issued from adorable and powerful thrones. They were burning expressions of the agitated feelings of the time. In these the real heart of the Nation had spoken out, when at the time of war, there was no occasion to conceal real sentiments through pressure or fear. This trmendous, heroic shout, 'Swadharma and Swaraj,' proclaims to the world the character of the Revolution in which 'all who draw the sword are equally glorious.' 
But were these two principles understood as different and exclusive of each other ? At least, orientals have never had the idea that Swadharma and Swaraj have no connection with each other. The Eastern mind has maintained a full and traditional belief, as is also said by Mazzini, that there is no vast barrier between Heaven and earth but that the two are ends of one and the same thing. Our idea of Swadharma, too, is not contradictory to that of Swaraj. The two are connected as means and end. Swaraj without Swadharma is despicable and Swadharma without Swaraj is powerless. The sword of material power, Swaraj, should always be ready drawn for our object, our safety is the other world, Swadharma. This trend of the Eastern mind will be often found in its history. The reason why, in the 
East all revolutions take a religious form, nay more, the reason why Eastern history knows of no revolutions unconnected with religion, lies in the all- embracing meaning that the word 'Dharma' has. That this dual principle of Swadharma and Swaraj, always seen in the history of India, appeared also in the Revolution of 1857, should be a matter of no surprise. We have already referred to the first Proclamation of the Emperor of Delhi. Afterwards when Delhi was beseiged by the English and the war was at its height, the Emperor issued another Proclamation addressing all Indians thus : 'Why has God given us wealth, land, power? They are not for individual pleasure, but they are give for the holy object of defence of our religion'. But where are now the means to attain this holy end ? As said in the Proclamation given above, where is the gift of Swaraj, the greatest of all the gifts of God ? 
Where is wealth ? Where is land? Where is power? In the plague of slavery, all this divine independence is all but dead. In the above Proclamation, in order to show how the plague of slavery was destroying India, full descriptions are given as to how the Kingdoms of Nagpur, Ayodhya, and Jhansi were tramples down into dust. And it awakens the people to the fact that they are guilty of the sin of destroying religion in the house of God, having lost these means of defending religion. The command of God is, Obtain Swaraj, for that is the chief key to the protection of Dharma. He who does not attempt to acquire Swaraj, he who sits silent in slavery, he is an atheist and hater of Religion. Therefore, rise for Swadharma and acquire Swaraj ! 
Rise for Swadharma and acquire Swaraj !" What divine events in the history of India are due to the realisation of this prionciple ! The poet- saint Ramdas gave the same dictum to the Mahrattas 250 years ago. "Die for your Dharma, kill the enemies of your Dharma while you are dying; in this way fight and kill, and take back your kingdom !" This alone is the principle 
in the Revolutionary War of 1857. This is its mental science. The true and clear form, is the above verse of Ramdas.3 
Seeing at it through this telescope, what a spectacle comes into view ! The war fought for Swadharma does not lose its lustre by defeat. The splendour of Guru Govind Singh's life is none the less, because his efforts did not immediately succeed at the time. Nor do we think the less of the rising of 1848 in Italy, because the Revolution failed completely at that time. 
Justin McCarthy says : "The fact was that throughout the greater part of the northern and north-western provinces of the Indian peninsula, there was a rebellion of the native races against the English power. It was not alone the Sepoy who rose in revolt - it was not by any means a merely military mutiny. It was a combination of military grievance, national hatred, and religious fanaticism against the English occupation of India. The native princes and the native soldiers were in it. The Mahomedan and the Hindu forgot their old religious antipathies to join against the Christian. Hatred and panic were the stimulants of that great rebellious movement. The quarrel about the greased cartridges was but the chance spark flung in among all the combustible material. If that spark had not lighted it, some other would have done the work The Meerut Sepoys found, in a moment, a leader, a flag, and a cause, and the mutiny was transformed into a revolutionary war. When they reached the Jumna, glittering in the morning light, they had all unconsciously seized one of the great critical moments of history and converted a military mutiny into a national and religious war ! "4 
3 Oçcçç&mççþçÇ cçjçJçW ~ cçjçíçÆvç DçJçI3ççbmç cççjçJçí. ~ cçççÆjlççb cçççÆjlççb I3ççJçW ~ jçp3çí DççHçáuçW ~~ 
4 History of Our Own Times, Vol.III. Charles Ball writes : "At length, the torrent overflowed the banks, and saturated the moral soil of India. It was then expected that those waves would overwhelm and destroy the entire European element and that, when the torrent of rebellion should again confine itself within bounds, patriotic India, freed from its alien rulers, would bow only to the independent sceptre of a native price. The movement, now, assumed a more important aspect. It became the rebellion of a whole people incited to outrage by resentment for imaginary wrongs and sustained in their delusions by hatred and fanaticism."5 
White writes in his Complete History of the Great Sepoy War :- "I should be wanting in faithfulness as an historian if I failed to record with admiration the courage displayed by the Oudhians. The great fault of the Oudh Talukdars from a moral point of view was their having made a common cause with the murderous mutineers. But for this, they might have been regarded as noble patriots, fighting in a good cause, pro rege et pro patria, for the King and the Motherland" – for Swaraj and Swadesh ! 
5 Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, page 644. 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER II THE CHAIN OF CAUSES 
If it is true that the question whether India, bounded by the Himalayas on the north and the Ocean on tne south, should be completely independent or not, was being solved on the battlefields of the war of 1857, then the chain of causes begins from that day in 1757 when the question was first raised. On the 23rd of June in 1757, the question whether India should belong to the Indians or to the English was openly discussed, for the first time, on the field of Plassey. On that very day and on that very field, where it was first discussed, were sown the seeds of the Revolution. If Plassey had not been there, the War of 1857 also would not have taken place. Though a century had rolled by, the memory of that day was fresh in the heart of Hindusthan. In proof of this, witness the terrible scene on the 23rd day of June 1857, in Northern India. In the vast country from the Punjab up to Calcutta, wherever there was an open field, thousands of Revolutionaries were fighting the English simultaneously in different places, from morning till evening, after openly challenging them saying : "To-day we are going to avenge Plassey !" 
When, on the battlefield of Plassey, India had sworn to fight a war of freedom, England was, as it were, anxious to hasten the day of its fulfilment as much as possible. For, Englishmen did not rest with sowing the seeds of the Revolutionary War at Plassey, but they made enormous efforts to encourage the growth of the plant all over India. Warren Hastings tended the plant in Benares, Rohilkhand, and Bengal. Wellesley did the same in the fertile fields of Mysore, Assai, Poona, Satara, and Northern India. This was not done without strong efforts, for the ground had to be ploughed not with ordinary ploughs but with swords and guns! What would ordinary ploughs avail against Shanwar Palace, the heights of Sahyadri, the forts of Agra, and the throne of Delhi ? When these rocky portions had been broken and crushed, the smaller pieces left out by mistake were also next broken. The smaller princes fell under the strokes of English perfidy, oppression, and tyranny. 
The English did not even feed well or pat on the back the brutes by whose strength they effected all these conquests. For a hundred years, they had been oppressing and maltreating the sepoys in their army. When the soldiers of the Mahrattas or the Nizam won important victories, they used to get Jahgirs and rewards. But the Company gave nothing but 'sweet words' of praise. The sepoys, whose swords won India for the English, were so barbarously treated that General Arthur Wellesley would drive the wounded sepoys to the mouth of guns instead of sending them to the hospital ! 
While the English had thus been sowing the seeds of discontent and hatred in almost all parts of Hindusthan, the time soon came when it appeared that their efforts would soon be crowned with success. The danger to the independence of India was first perceived by Nana Farnavis of Poona and Hyder Sahib of Mysore. From that day onwards the presence of this danger began to be seen, faintly at least, by the princes of India; and its effect was markedly seen in the "mutiny" at Vellore. This rising at Vellore was a rehearsal of the great rising of 1857. Just as in a theatre, before the actual performance, several rehearsals have to be gone through, so in history, before the actual and final attainment of freedom, in order to harmonise the whole performance, several rehearsals in the shape of risings are necessary. In Italy, the rehearsals started as early as 1821, and only in 1861 was the play successful. The Rising at Vellore in 1806 was such a rehearsal on a small scale. In this rising, the sepoys had been won over by the princes and people. At markets, preachers disguised as Fakirs were preaching. To indicate the time of rising, chapatees even had been distributed. Hindus and Mahomedans together had risen in the name of religion and liberty. But this being the first rehearsal, they fell even as they were rising. Never mind ! Before the final performance, how many rehearsals have to be gone through ! Only the actors should boldly stick to their tasks and never cease their rehearsals. And for producing this drama, both England and India were working day and night without rest. And those that were making ready to take part in the play were not common, poor, or ignorant folk. The Gadi of Tanjore, and Masnad of Mysore, the Raigarh of Sahyadri, the Dewan-I-Khas of Delhi were among the select actors. And to crown all, Lord Dalhousie landed on the shores of Hindusthan in 1846. 
There is not now much time left for commencing the task which was sworn to on the battlefield of Plassey. 
From the above chain of causes, it will be clearly seen that, before Dalhousie landed in India, the seeds of discontent had gone deep, very dedep, all over Hindusthan. Rajas and Maharajas, deprived of their kingdoms by the English, were burning in their hearts. The fact that the centenary of Plassey was approaching inspired a strange feeling of hope among the people; and in the very armies of the English, the sepoys were secretly chafing with rage and hatred. Even if India had had at this time a Viceroy who would strive to allay this secret discontent, it is very doubtful how far his efforts would have been successful. The question now was not whether the Company's rule should be good or bad; but the only question that used to be asked all over the country was whether the rule should exist at all. The one other force that was necessary for making an attempt to solve definitely this question was supplied when Dalhousie became viceroy; for he gave up the policy of coating poison pills with sugar before administering them to the victim, and began a system of open and direct oppression which did not fail to burn its way into the hearts of the masses. 
Lord Dalhousie is described, by English historians, as one of the founders of the English Empire. This fact alone is sufficient to form an estimate of his capacity and character. In a country where unjust wars of conquest and oppression of foreign nationalities and races are universally popular, it is no wonder that those who have committed the greatest injustice and oppression are the most honoured. Thus, he who is most unjust is deemed the most capable, and one has no better way of proving himself a great man in such a country than by committing a climax of injustice. In such an Empire, where there is such an emulation of injustice and oppression, Lord Dalhousie was given the significant title of a 'founder' ; it is impossible to find a more suitable word to describe his character. With the result of a hundred years of wicked English policy behind him, obstinate by nature, possessed of boundless self- confident, his flesh and blood permitted by the glory and pride of an unjust Empire, this bold, if not clever, man landed on the shores of out land saying openly, "I will level the land of Hindusthan." 
As soon as Dalhousie landed, he saw at once that so long as Ranjit Singh's lions lived in the Panjab, it was impossible to achieve, the object dear to his heart of levelling Hindusthan. He, therefore, determined to throw somehow or other the lion of the Panjab in the cage of Slavery. But the Panjab lion had no ordinary claws. Seeing his cave threatened, he rushed out of the lair at Chillianwalla and, with a terrible stroke of his paw, mauled the enemy and made him bleed. But, alas ! While the lion was standing at the mouth of the cave at Chillianwalla, a traitor broke open the back-wall at Guzerat and the lion was surprised and captured. Soon the cave of the lion became his cage ! Ranjit's Queen, Chand Kuvar, dies rotting in London ! And the lion's cub, Dhulip Singh, ate the beggar's bread at the hands of the Feringhi enemy ! 
After the annexation of the Panjab, Lord Dalhousie wrote in his despatch, the proud sentence that the extent of the British Empire was now continuous from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin. But now that the British frontiers had been pushed to the Himalayas on the north and to the seas on the south, it was inevitable that he should have an ambition to create an eastern and a western frontier suitable to these northern and southern ones. Then why delay ? Send a 'peace' mission to Burma and the work is done. This peace mission so tightly embraced the peace of Burma that its ribs were broken and it expired ! This very loving task was soon over and Burma was also annexed. Now at last, the whole of Hindusthan - from the Himalayas to Rameshwar and from the Sindhu to the Iravady became red - but, oh ! Dalhousie , do you not fear that it will soon be redder still ? 
Do we realise what is meant by the annexation of the Panjab and Burma ? We cannot form an idea of it from mere names. The Panjab alone is a territory of 50,000 sq. miles and a population of four millions ! It is the land watered by five sacred rivers of the Vedas, on the banks of which the Rishis in ancient times had recited sacred mantras ! To conquer such a region Alexander came from Greece, to defend such a region King Porus fought. After taking such a country, the ambition even of Ravana would have been satisfied; but the land-hunger of Dalhousie was not satisfied even after swallowing not only the Panjab but also the extensive dominion of Burma. Though the frontiers of India were extended, there still remained the 
graves of ancient kingdoms within. Dalhousie therefore began to root these out and level everything. Not only did they occupy too much valuable space, but there was the fear that from these graves might one day rise the future avengers of India's wrongs. 
In the grave at Satara was buried a magnificent Hindu Empire. And it is no wonder that Dalhousie, who was a believer in the Resurrection of Jesus was afraid that out of Satara might rise a future Hindu Emperor who would confound the foreigner and establish Swaraj. In April 1848, Appa Sahib, the Maharaja of Satara, died. At this news, Dalhousie decided to annex that State. And what was the reason ? The king had no direct heirs ! Even the cottage of the village labourer who has no direct heir is not confiscated but is given to his adopted son or to his near relatives. And Satara was not a peasant's cottage but an 'ally' of the English Government. In the year 1839, Pratap Singh Chhatrapati had been charged with having engaged in a conspiracy with the object of overthrowing the British Government, was dethroned, and in his place Chhatrapati Appa Sahib was appointed by the English Sirkar to succeed him 6. Mr. Arnold, in his book Dalhousie's Administration, says " It is not pleasant to dwell, on the circumstances of the dethronement - so discreditable they were." After such shamelessly discreditable dethronement, the English established on the Gadi of Satara the brother, on account of the failure of legitimate sons. By this, the English practically acknowledged the right of other relations - as is the invariable law laid down by the Hindu Shastras - to succeed to the throne. The only truth about this whole affair is that Dalhousie, with the habitual 
6 The first article in the treaty entered into by the Sirkar with the Chhatrapati, when he 
was placed on the throne of Satara, runs as follows :- " The valiant English Government 
on its part agrees to give the country or territory specified, to the Government or State 
of His Highness the Maharaja Chhatrapati (the Raja of Satara); His Highness the 
Maharaja Chhatrapati and His Highness’s sons and heirs and successors are 
perpetually, that is from generation to generation, to reign in sovereignty over the said 
territory.” 
treachery of his nation, overrode this open acknowledgement knowingly and deliberately, because it was profitable to do so. 
No one could under any pretext say that the English in any of the various treaties concluded with the various Rajas, had refused to acknowledge the right of adopted children to succeed to their adoptive parents' thrones. In 1825, the Company, while acknowledging the right of the adopted child of the Raja of Kota to succeed, openly declared :- "The Prince of Kota must be considered to possess the right, in common with all other Hindus, of adopting a son and successor in conformity with the rules of the Shastras." 
Again, in 1837, when the Raja of Oorcha adopted a successor, the English acknowledged him and promised :- 
"Hindu sovereigns have a right to adopt, to the exclusion of collateral heirs, and the British Government is bound to acknowledge the adoption, provided it is regular and not in violation of the Hindu law."7 It may be safely asserted that nowhere else but in English politics could be found the audacity of denying the very existence of those promises which were given most definitely and which are contained in their own documents. Not only by these declarations but on innumerable other occasions, the English have acknowledged the right of the native princes to adopt in accordance with the Hindu Shastras. Suffice it to say that, within the short period of two years (1846-47), the English Government had consented to the succession to the Gadi of innumerable adopted sons, and acknowledged their rights. 
Indeed, to try to seek, in the language of promises and treaties, the root cause of annexing these states, is to work in a wrong direction altogether. The real truth of the matter is that Dalhousie had come to reduce all India to a dead level and the grave of the Hindu Empire at Sarata was trying to raise its head. Obviously, therefore, though Pratap Singh and Appa Sahib had both adopted in accordance with the Hindu Shastras, the English 
7 Parliamentary Papers, 15th February, 1850, page 141 
annexed the Raj under the pretext of failure to legitimate heirs. The Gadi of Satara ! The same Gadi on which Shivaji was crowned by the hand of Gaga Bhatt ! The same Gadi to which Baji Rao I. dedicated all his triumph, before which he bowed low ! O Maharashtra ! behold that same Gadi, on which Shivaji sat, and to which homage was paid by Santaji, Dhanaji, Niraji, and Baji, has been broken to pieces by Dalhousie ! Go on, if you will, with your petitions ad deputations. What if Dalhousie does not listen to these ? In England at least, you think, the Directors will listen to you ? Dalhousie is apparently a mere man; but, who knows, perhaps the Directors in England might be more than men. None in Maharashtra has seen these same Gods. It was, therefore, thought proper that Rango Bapuji, an excellent and loyal man, should go to England to lay the grievances of Satara before the 'Home' authorities. Success or no success, the game was at least, they thought, worth trying. But how long would they wait, hoping against hope, for the success of their mission ? For how long would Rango Bapuji go on wearing away the very pavement of Leadenhall Street ? Yes, Rango Bapuji will go on clinging to his impossible hope till he is mocked at and insulted, till every penny is spent in feeing English barristers with crores of Rupees so that he has not money left even for his passage, and until he receives the insolent reply that they refuse to give back Satara ! 
While Rango Bapuji was busy packing for London, Balhousie's attention was being absorbed by a new affair; for, an occasion had risen by which he could weed out the miserable shrunken shrub of the Raj of Nagpur. Raghoji Bhonsle, the rightful owner of the Nagpur Gadi, died suddenly at the age of 47. The Raja of Berar was an ally of the Engliosh Government,4 and this very friendship of the English was the cause of his destruction! Those who knew that the English hated them were spared but all those who foolishly believed that the English were their friends were mercilessly and treacherously involved in ruin. The kingdom of the Berars was not the Englishman's jahgir, nor was it a feudatory state dependent for its existence on his sweet will and pleasure. It was an independent state on an equality with the Feringhi Sirkar. J. Sylvian has defied the British Government to show on what grounds and by what show of justice, either eastern or western, they could have the right of annexing such a Raj, merely because the king died childless. Obviously it was a game of 4. The treaty of 1826 
beging as follows :- Treaty of perpetual friendship between the Honourable East India Company and His Highness of Maharaja Raghoji Bhonsle, his heirs and successors. 
legerdemain or sleight-of-hand; one removes and the other, his accomplice, conceals it quietly ! While the opne cuts off the head, the other, his accomplice, goes on asking loudly by what law he dared commit the deed - as if murderers and highway robbers need the law to b back them up. In 1853, then Dalhousie at last laid his murderous knife at the throat of 'his friend', showing as a reason that the Raja had not adopted a successor. Raja Raghoji had every hope of a child but died suddenly. Even if he died without a child, the right of adopting passed at his death to his legal wife. If the English had not acknowledged at any time previously the heirs adopted by the queens of deceased Rajas, we should have had nothing to say. But it remains a fact that the English had acknowledged the adoption of Daulatrao Scindia's widow in 1826, the adoption by Junkoji Scindia's widow in 1836, the adoption by the widow of the Raja of Dhar in 1834, and the adoption by the queen of Kishengarh in 1841. Not one, not two, but many such adoptions have the English acknowledged. But we should not forget the fact that, on these occasions, it was to their advantage to acknowledge these heirs. In this case, on the other hand, it was not to their advantage to acknowledge the adoption by the widow of Raghoji. The real point at issue, then was one of advantage to the English Government, and everything was determined on that issue. While the Raj of Nagpur was annexed because no adoption took place, the Satara kingsom faced a similar fate because the adopted heir should have a right to succeed to the throne! Impossible for logic to step in here. 
By annexing Nagpur, Dalhousie robbed an extensive tract of 76,832 sq.miles, with a population of 4,650,000 people and an enormous annual income. While the poor Ranees were weeping themselves hoarse, a loud knock came on the palace gate. The door was opened and in rushed the English troops. Horses were let loose from the stables, elephants- after forcibly pulling down the Ranees riding on them - were taken to the bazaars for sale, and silver and gold ornaments were removed from the palace and were sold by public auction in every street. The necklace that adorned a 
queen was lying in the dust of the bazaars. Elephants were sold for 100 Rupees ! After this you will hardly be surprised to lean that horses, fed on richer food than Dalhousie had for his own dinners, were sold for 20 Rupees and that a pair of horses, on which the Raja himself used to ride, was sold for 5 Rupees! Elephants with the howdas on them and horses with caparisons were sold, but the Ranees still remained with their jewels. Why not sell the jewels ? So, the jewels also went the way of other things, and no Ranee had a single jewel left on her person. But even here the "friendship" of the English could not stop. So, they began to dig the floor of the place ! And, Heavens, in the very bedroom of the Ranees the Feringhi pickaxe began its desecrating work ! Reader, start not yet, not tremble, for the pickaxe has only started the work, and will do further deeds, nay, is doing it. For, see you not it has broken the bedstead of the Queen, and is digging the very flooring underneath the bed ? And shall we say it ? All the while the Maharanee Anna Poorna Bai was on her death-bed, and was even then dying ! While the Dowager Queen of the great family of the Bhonsles of Nagpur was on her deathbed, groaning with agony and for the insult to the throne and the family, in the neighbouring room, in that bed of the Queen, the Feringhi's pickaxe was doing its work ! What a terrible accompaniment to the groans in the next room ! And why all this ? Because Raghoji died before adopting a successor!8 
Ranee Anna Poorna Bai died, groaning for the insufferable insults flung at her ancient dynasty. But the hope of Ranee Banka to get justice from England was not yet dead ! This vain hope was at last destroyed, but not until she had tried the immensely expensive remedy of feeing English barristers with lakhs of Rupees. Ands what did Ranee Banka do then ? She spent the rest of her life in "loyalty" to the Feringhi ! While the Lightning was working destruction at Jhansi, Banka, seeing that her sons were ready to unsheath their swords of Swaraj, threatened them that, if they did unsheath their swords, she would herself inform the Feringhis of their designs and advise the Feringhis to behead them !9 
8 Balhousie's Administration, pp. 165-168. 9 Banka, thy name shall go down to History as Banka the treacherous. INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER III NANA SAHIB & LAXMI BAI 
Blow your trumpets loudly now, O Heralds of History, for soon there are to arrive on the scene two great heroes ! These are two bright pearls in the necklace of Mother India. Now, then dark night has overspread the horizon of the whole country, these two alone are shining as luminous stars. They are fiery Akalis ready to avenge their country's unjust wrong with the last drop of their blood. They are two martyrs sacrificing their lives for Country, Religion, and Freedom. They are two witnesses, sword in hand, to prove that the blood of Hindusthan that gave birth to Shivaji is not yet dead. They are two noble souls that could entertain in their hearts the grant and holy ambition of Swaraj. They are two crusaders in the Holy War, glorious even in their defeat. Therefore, O readers, stand up in all awe and reverence, for the noble figures of Nana Sahib Peshwa and the Queen of Jhansi are coming on the stage of History ! 
We do not know which to describe more - the splendour of the mountain tops of Matheran in the holy Maharashtra, or the green, velvet- soft, grassy meadows adorning the feet of those hiolls. In the lap of the graceful plateau below, almost overhung by the sky-reaching peaks of the Matheran, there nestled a tiny little village called Venu, heightening the beauty of the already beautiful region. Among the old and respectable families of Venu, the family of Madhavrao Narayan Bhatt was the most prominent. Madhavrao and his noble wife Gangabai, though living in circumstances of domestic poverty, were happy in the enjoyment of mutual love. In the small house of this good family, all factrs beamed with joy and happiness in 1824, for the good Gangabai had given birth to a son. That son of Madhavrao and Gangabai was no other than the Peshwa Nana Sahib, at the very sound of whose name the Feringhi shudders with fear, - that same Nana who has made his name immortal in history as a hero who fought for liberty and for his country. 
About the same time, the last Bajirao had abdicated his throne and was leading a life of retirement on the banks of Ganges. Many Maratha families had followed him and, hearing that Bajirao was generous enough to 
support them in good state on his pension, many new families also emigrated thither. Among the latter was the family of Madhavrao, who went to Brahmavarta in 1827 to seek the generosity of Bajirao. There, the little son of Madhavrao captivated the heart of Bajirao, and little Nana Sahib became a great favourite of the whole Durbar. His spirit even in childhood, his serious mien and his intelligence made a deep impression upon Bajirao, who eventually resolved to adopt him. On the 7th of June, 1827, Bajirao formally placed him on his lap and adopted him. At this time Nana was only two- and-a-half years old. In this manner, the child born in the village of Venu became, by a stroke of luck, the heir presumptive to the throne of the Peshwas ! 
It was no doubt a great good fortune to be made heir to the seat of the Peshwas of the Mahratta Empire. But, O brilliant Prince, do you realise the great responsibility accompanying this good fortune ? The throne of the Peshwas is not an ordinary thing ! It was on this that the great Baji sat and ruled an Empire. It was for this that the battle of Paniput was fought. On this have been poured the sacred waters of the Sindhu for the anointing of generations of Peshwas; on this the treaty of Wargaon had been made and, most important of all, on this is to come, or any, already has come, the contaminating touch of slavery. Do you realise all this ? To be the heir to a throne is to undertake, to guarantee, the protection and dignity of that throne. Then will you or will your not guard the dignity of the Peshwa throne ? Either the Gadi should be adorned with the crown of victory, or it should be burnt in a brilliant pyre of glory, like the proud women of Chitore ! There is no third way of saving the glory of the Peshwa's throne ! O brilliant Prince ! Think of this terrible responsibility, and then site on the Gadi of the Peshwas ! Since your father gave reason for the taunt that the Peshwa's Gadi surrendered, the whole of Maharashtra has became black with shame, and all desire that if the Gadi is to enter after all, it should end even as it began - that if it is to die, it should die fighting ! Sit proudly on that Gadi, O young Nana, so that History may say with pride that the Gadi, whose first Peshwa was Balaji Vishvanath, had for its last occupant Nana Sahib ! 
At about the same time in sacred Varanasi, there lives in the retinue of Chimnaji Appa Peshwa, Moropant Tambe and his wife Bhagirathi Bai. Little did the couple know at the time that their name would become immortal in History ! This couple, which had the good fortune of giving 
birth to a daughter who was to be a veritable flashing sword in the hands of Hindusthan, this couple hardly understood its good fortune. Do the thorny branches know that, in the spring, a rose, delighting all with its fragrance, would spring forth from out of them ! But though the branches knew it now, still, as soon as the spring time of Hindusthan came, the flower did come forth ! It was in 1835 that Bhagirathi gave birth to the heroine, Ranee Lakshmi Bai. This brave woman's name in youth was Manu Bai. 
When Manu was hardly three or four years old, the whole family left Benares and went to the court of Bajirao at Brahmavarta. There she was so much liked by all the people that they called here "Chabeli". Prince Nana Sahib and the sweet Chabeli ! When two such children braced each other in childish affection, what a sight must it have been to the people of Brahmavarta ! What eyes would not glisten with joy to see Prince Nana Sahib and the Chabeli playing together in the armoury and learning their lessons in sword-play - lessons which they were destined to use in later life for the defence of their country and their religion? How limited, indeed, is the vision of man ! When Nana Sahib and Lakshmi Bai were learning sword-play together, the spectators did not see the future glory of these brilliant children, and now those who do see their glory, have no longer the good fortune to see those children's games of the past ! Still, if, to remove the short-sightedness of these eyes of flesh, we put on the spectacles of imagination, then we can easily see those games of the past. While Nana Sahib and Rao Sahib (his cousin) were learning their lessons under their tutor, this Chabeli too would closely watch them, and thus she learned to read, though stumbling often. Nana Sahib would be sitting in howdah on an elephant and the sweet child would affectionately call up to him, "Won't you take me too ?"10 Sometimes Nana would lift her up, and both would learn to ride the magnificent animal. Sometimes Nana would be on a horse and wait for Lakshmi to come and join him ; just then she would come up galloping with a sword at her side, with her hair slightly dishevelled by the wind, and her hair complexion becoming ruddier by her efforts to curb the spirited horse. And both would start away at a smart pace. As this time, Nana was eighteen years old and Lakshmi Bai was seven; what a pleasant memory to 
10 Parasnis's Life of the Queen of Jhansi. 
us that the heroine should have started her training for the holy was at the age of seven ? These two jewels were extremely fond of each other from their earliest childhood. In Brahmavarta, at that time, were being brought up three of the most important characters of the Revolutionary War of 1857, Nana Sahib, Queen Lakshmi Bai, and Tatya Tope. It is said, that on every festival of Yamadvitiya, these two, Nana Sahib and Lakshmi Bai - historical brother and sister- used to perform the ceremony of Bhaubij. We can well picture to ourselves the sweet attractive spirited Chabeli, with a golde dish and with lamps in her hand, performing the ceremony. Such occasions when a Lakshmi Bai is waving the sacred lamp round the face of a Nana Sahib, such occasions make history more romantic than romance ! 
In the early life of Nana Sahib and Manu Bai, we have the key to their future greatness. Their flesh and blood, even in early childhood, had been permeated by the love of Swaraj and a noble sense of self-respect and pride of ancestry. In 1842, the Chabeli was given In marriage to Maharaja Gangadhar Rao Baba Sahib of Jhansi, and thus became Maharani Lakshmi Bai of Jhansi. She was extremely popular at the Court of that place and gained the affection and devoted loyalty of all her subjects, as the later part of this history will show. 
In 1851, the Peshwa Bajirao II died. Let not a single tear be shed for his death ! For, after losing his own kingdom in 1818, this blot in the escutcheon of the Peshwas spent his time in helping to ruin the kingdoms of other kings ! He saved considerably on the pension of eight lakhs of Rupees allowed to him by the Company's Government, and invested it in the notes of the Company. Later when the English went to war with Afghanistan, he helped them with a loan of fifty lakhs out of his savings. Soon after, the English went to war with the Sikh nation of the Panjab. And all were in hopes, and the English in fears, that the Mahratta at Brahmavarta would make common cause with the Sikh Misals against the English power. When almost the whole of India was fighting against Aurangzeb, Shri Guru Govind Singh, after a defeat in the Panjab, had come into the Maharashtra, it is said, to enter into an active alliance with the Mahrattas. Now it seemed that the Mahrattas would go into Northern India on a similar mission, and perform the unfulfilled promises of the alliance. But Baji spoiled the sport at the eleventh hour. This Baji - this Peshwa of Shivaji and his descendants - spent money out of his own pocket and sent one thousand infantry and one 
thousand cavalry to the assistance of the English ! This Bajirao had not troops enough to help the enemy to desecrate the house of Guru Govind Singh ! O unfortunate nation ! The Mahrattas should take the kingdom of the Sikhs and the Sikhs should take the kingdom of the Mahrattas - and all this for what ? In order that the English might dance in joy over the corpses of both. We have rather to thank the God of Death that such a traitor - this Baji - died before 1857. 
Before his death, Baji Rao made a will by which he bequeathed all the rights of succession and powers of the Peshwa to his adopted son Nana Sahib. But immediately on the news of Baji Rao's death, the English Government announced that Nana Sahib had no right whatsoever to the pension of eight lakhs. What must have Nana Sahib thought on hearing this decision of the English ? The conflict of passions in his heart is portrayed to some extent in the despatch written under his direction. It says : "It is simply unjust that the high family of thePeshwa should be treated by the Company so lightly as this. When our throne and kingdom were handed over to the Company by Shrimant Bajirao, it was done so on the condition that the Company should pay eight lakhs of Rupees every year, as its price. If this pension is not to last for ever, how can the surrender of the kingdom, which was given as a consideration for this pension, last for ever in your hands ? That one party alone should be bound by the contract, while the other itentionally fails to do its part is absurd, unjust, and inconsistent."11 Then follows a clear and well reasoned passage refuting the theory that he, being an adopted son, cannot get his father's rights, citing authorities from Hindu Shastras, from rules of politics and customary law. After that, the despatch of Nana Sahib continues :- "The Company puts forward another excuse to cease to pay the pension, namely that Bajirao II has saved a considerable sum which is quite sufficient to defray the expenses of his family. But the Company forgets that the pension was given as a condition of the treaty, and there is no single clause in the treaty directing the mode in which the pension should be spent. The pension is the price of the kingdom given, and Bajirao would have been justified had he saved even the whole of the pension ! We ask the Company whether they have got the least right to 
11 Nana's Claims against the East India Company. 
question the manner in which the pension is expended ? Nay, can the Company ask even its own servants as to how they spend their pensions or what they save out of it ? But it is strange that a question, which the Company dare not ask even of its own servants, is raised in the case of the heir to a royal dynasty, and is made the pretence to break a treaty." With this argumentative and spirited despatch, Nana's faithful ambassador, Azimullah Khan, left for England. 
Of the important characters in the Revolutionary War of 1857, the name of Azimullah Khan is one of the most memorable. Among the keen intellects and minds that first conceived the idea of the War of Independence, Azimullah must be given a prominent place. And among the many plans by which the various phases of the Revolution were developed, the plans of Azimullah deserve special notice. 
Azimullah was very poor by birth. He rose gradually on the strength of his own merits, and at last became the trusted adviser of Nana Sahib. His early poverty was such that he served as a waiter in the household of an Englishman. Even while in such a low state, the fire of ambition was always burning in his heart. He took advantage of his profession as a Baberchi in order to learn foreign languages, and in a short time he had learned to speak English and French with fluency. After acquiring a knowledge of both these languages, Azimullah left the service of the Feringhis and began to study in a school at Cawnpore. By his extraordinary ability, he soon became a teacher at the self-same school. While still serving as a teacher in the Government school at Cawnpore, his reputation as an able scholar reached the ears of Nana Sahib, and he was introduced at the Brahmavarta Durbar. Once, at the Durbar, his wise counsels were appreciated and valued by Nana Sahib, who would take no important step without first consulting Azimullah. In 1854, he was made the chief representative of Nana Sahib and sent to England. His face was noble, his speech sweet and silvery. Knowing very well the customs and manners of contemporary English life, he soon became very popular among Londoners. Attracted by his pleasant and silvery voice, his spirited mien and Oriental magnificence, several young English women well in love with Azimullah. There used to be a crowd, in those days, in the parks of London and on the beach at Brighton, to see this jewelled Indian "Raja". Some English women of respectable families were so much infatuated with him that, even after his 
return to India, they would send him letters couched in the most affectionate terms. When, later, Havelock's army captured Brahmavarta, he saw there the original letters written by some English ladies to their "Darling Azimullah !" But though English women were captivated by Azimullah, still the East India Company would not leave their stern attitude. They put him off for some time with beguiling words, and at last gave the stereotyped answer, "We entirely approve of the decision of the Governor-General that the adopted so of Bajirao has no claim whatsoever to his father's pension." Thus, as regards the principal object of his mission he was disappointed, in a way. We say "in a way"; because at this very moment, a new inspiration, a new hope, was rising in his heart. There was no necessity of any foreigner's consent to realise this hope, but it depended for its realisation on his own country and countrymen ! How to get the consent of his own men ? How to acquire the independence of his country by force when it could not be acquired by Sama, Dana, or Bheda (conciliation, money, or division) ? These thoughts breathed a new hope and a new life into Azimullah's heart. 
At this self-same moment, right in the heart of London, a Brahmin was sitting, brooding over the means for attainment of that which he was unable to obtain by petition or by prayer and his heart, filled with vengeance born of despair, was planning dozens of schemes for the attainment of his object. This was Rango Bapuji of Satara. Azimullah, the representative of the Peshwa, used often to visit him, and they both used to hold secret consultations. Leaving these two- one, the representative of the Chhatrapati of Satara himself, and the other, the representative of the Prime Minister of the Chhatrapati - to the quiet and secret revolution of the problem of saving the Hindu Empire, let us turn our attention to the activities of Nana Sahib. 
Fortunate will be the day when a complete and systematic history of the life of Shrimant Nana Sahib Peshwa will be before the world. Meanwhile, until such a day arrives, it would not be out of place to recount in brief some of the details of his life about this period, as published by the 
English historians, bitter enemies of Nana Sahib as they are. We have already related incidentally the story of his youth. He had married a cousin of the chief of Sangli. While in the north, in 1857, the Revolution was being resolved upon, this relation of Nana Sahib was making strenuous efforts to achieve the same end in Maharashtra by working in the Poatwardhan State. Nana had made Brahmavarta his home after the demise of his father. This city was in itself very beautiful, while the sacred Bhagirathi which flowed close to the city walls greatly added to its beauty. The palace of Nana commanded a most charming view; before him stretched the quite waters of the Bhagirathi; the banks were cheerfully alive with throngs of men and women; and beautiful temples of fames architecture raised their cupolas all along the banks. The Palace of the Peshwa was a grant structure. Its political, administrative, and other offices, and the large shops and well-kept roads inside the gates, amply testified to the activities within the palace. The many extensive halls within this palace were decorated with rich carpets and gorgeous tapestries. Most valuable china selected with faultless taste, magnificent candelabra studded with diamonds, beautifully carved mirrors, carved ivory of finest workmanship, gold art works richly set with diamonds, in short, all the luxury and taste and splendour of the Hindu palace were to be seen there.12 The steeds and camels of Shrimant Nana Saheb were caparisoned in silver. Nana's fondness for horses was well known, and it is said that none could excel either him or Lakshmi Bai in horsemanship. His stables were a fine collection of splendid breeds. His special hobby was animals, and people even from far-off parts used to come to Brahmavarta, to see his deer and his gazelles brought from various parts of India, his camels, and his pointers. Yet, be it noted that, above all things, it was on his splendid collection of arms that Shrimant prided himself most. It included arms of all kinds and for all purposes,- swords of best-tempered steel, modern long- range rifles, and big guns of various sizes. 
12 See Thomson's Cawnpore. Peculiar importance attaches to this man and his book owing to the fact that he was one of the two men who survived the massacre at Cawnpore. 
Immensely proud of his high birth and conscious of his noble ancestry, Nana had quietly made up his mind that he would either live as became that noble parentage, or pass away from memory altogether. It is a significant fact, that in the main hall and in a prominent place were hund the portraits of those great and capable men who had adorned Mahratta history.13What did those faces speak to him ? What did the portrait of Chhatrapati Shivaji say to him? What a tumult of feelings must have arisen in his mind when he saw Baji Rao I, the Bhao of Panipat, the youthful and regal Viswas, the wise Madhava, and statesman Nana Farnavis, in the portraits before him ! The very consciousness that he was born in a family which would boast of such great names, must have been constantly impelling him to, what thoughts ? Nana, there is no doubt, must have felt, and felt terribly, the woeful humiliation of petitioning to his enemies for a pension for that Empire, of which his ancestors were the Prime Ministers, nay, rulers. The stories of the noble deeds of the great Shivaji, whose memory he fondly cherished, must, without doubt, have set ablaze in his heart the flames of anger and vengeance. A Sanskrit proverb says, "The honourable prefer death to dishonour," and Nana was above all honourable. Generous as a prince, pride was his greatest wealth - as it always is of the brave. Hence he could not bear the idea of accepting any invitation from the European officers about him. For was he not, as the Peshwa, entitled to the salute of gunds, which the Company was not willing to fire in his honour ? He was serious constitutionally and his habits were simple. He had not a trace of extravagant habits or vices.14 An Englishman who had observed him closely on many occasions says that, at the time he saw him, he was really about twenty-eight years of age, but he looked forty. "He was inclined to embonapoint; his face was round; his eyes, restless like those of a tiger, were 
13 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, page 304. 14 "A quiet and unostentatious young man not at all addicted to any extravagant 
habits."- Sir John Kaye. 
piercing and of great lustre; his complexion was like that of any Spaniard; his conversation was characterised by a touch of humour."15 In the Durbar, he was dressed in kinkhabs. Englishmen used to admire the jewellery he displayed about his person and his crowns studded with diamonds. His generous and sympathetic heart, had effectually won the love of his subjects. His kindness to his subjects would be quite natural, but it is significant that Shrimant was habitually generous even towards those very English people, who, turning ungrateful, had deprived him of his all. If any youthful English couple wanted change of air, the rich equipage of Maharaja Nana Sahib was ready at their service. Many a "Sahib", tired of living in Cawnpore, used to pay a visit with his "memsahib" to the town of Maharaja Nana Sahib, and presents to rich shawls and valuable pearls and diamonds were made to them on the occasion of their leavingBrahmavarta.16 It may be seen clearly from this that the poison of individual hatred never touched the noble soul of Nana. The elevated and heroic ideal, of generously treating those very enemies with social courtesy and obligation, whom, on the battlefield, you would remorselessly destroy, has again and again been celebrated in the epics and histories of Hindusthan. The Rajput heroes used to treat their bitterest enemies with splendid generosity. Be it noted, therefore, in this connection, that there was considerable cordiality between Nana and the English at this time.17 As long as they could feast at the palace of the Shrimant, the English officers and their wives were heaping friendly praise upon him, but as soon as he lifted the Sword of righteousness in the cause of 
15 Trevelyan's Cawnpore, pages 68-69. 
16 Trevelyan's Cawnpore, pages 68-69. 17 'Nothing could exceed the cordiality which he constantly displayed in his intercourse 
with our countrymen. The persons in authority placed an implicit confidence in his 
friendliness and good faith, and the ensigns emphatically pronounced him a capital 
fellow.”- Trevelyan’s Cawnpore. Swaraj and Swadesh on the battlefield of Cawnpore, what ignominy and what low abuse they heaped on him ! 
Shrimant was well educated, and had the refinement of culture. He took great interest in politics and political affairs. He used to watch and closely study the ever-changing affairs of great nations, and for that purpose would closely follow the English press. He used to have the daily papers read to him every morning by Mr.Tod, an Englishman afterwards massacred at Cawnpore. He thus was able to observe, with his lynx-eye, all the political changes in England and in India. When heated discussions were taking place over the question of annexing Oudh, Nana was of opinion that that act would inevitably force on a war.18 
As this description is compiled from the histories written by Nana's enemies, it is to be noted that those virtues which his enemies ascribe to him must have been a distinct feature in his character. For it cannot be expected that English historians, with their terrible hatred for Nana, could acknowledge willingly his eminent virtues except where absolutely necessary. and good faith, and the ensigns emphatically pronounced him a capital fellow."- Trevelyan's Cawnpore. The tardy acknowledgment of such virtues is the more significant, as after this slight confession of truth, these very historians have wreaked to the full their devilish vengeance on Nana for having leaped forth into the battlefield. The poisonous pen of English historians has taken a fiendish delight in calling him a "badmash', a "high way robber", a "fiend", and "Satan", and has been heaping upon him low, vulgar, and dishonest abuse. But even if all this abuse was deserved, still the single fact, that Nana fought for Swarajya and bled for Swadesh, is sufficient to establish his loving memory in the heart of us Indians. It was essentially necessary that the whole world should realise the fact that a grant and terrible vengeance is visited sooner or later 
18 Charles Ball's India Mutiny, Vol.I, p.304. 
on those who dare to commit the sin of depriving Hindusthan of Independence. Nana was the incarnation of vengeance of the land of Hind ! Nana was the Narasimha Mantra of this land ! Yes; this one fact will impress Nana's memory on the tablet of our hearts ! Yet with this particular merit of Nana, when one further remembers the individual instances of his generosity, his pride of birth, and above all his noble and patriotifc heart, one's head bows in loving adoration of that grant personality; and then rises before one's mind's eye the fair and noble form of Nana, with his huge strength, crown on his head, his bright and alert eyes red with injured pride, the sword (worth three lakhs of Rupees) by his side keen and ready to leap forth from the scabbard, and his body all aflame with anger and keen desire to avenge the Swarajya and the Swadesh ! 
Ye, conflicting emotions, stop ! What a terrible tumult is happening there ! The insolent message, the last, has come to Nana from the English, that he has not a vestige of claim to the pension of Baji Rao; nay, that he must even give up the proprietary rights to Brahmavarta; and this, the Company further claimed, was justice ! Justice ? Now the English need not take the trouble of giving a definite reply whether it was justice or injustice ! Extensive preparations are in progress and there, on the field of Cawnpore, will be determined the issue of the question. It is there that the question, whether it is justice or injustice to injure the heart of a Mahratta, will be fully discussed. Decapitated, headless trunks, mutilated bodies, flowing streams of blood - these will determine the issue. Aye, and the vultures sitting on the parapets of the well of Cawnpore will listen to this discussion and give a definite answer to the issue raised, Justice or Injustice ? 
While splendid preparations were being made for this extraordinary ceremony at Nana's palace, his Chhabeli sister was not sitting idle. Before her had come the same question - Justice or Injustice ? When she adopted her darling Damodar as her son, soon after the sudden death of her husband in 1853, the English annexed Jhansi, refusing to recognise the rights of adoption. But Jhansi was not a state which could be annexed by 
mere word or letter. Not the Banka of Nagpur, but the dear sister Chhabeli of Nana - Ranee Lakshmi Bai was ruling there ! As if she cared a whit for this "annexation" ! From her proud heart, seeing this low and heartless cunning of the English, pealed forth the thunders born of injured pride and a sense of honour, and through these the lightning of Jhansi declared, "Give up my Jhansi ? - I will not ! Let him try to take who dares !!" "Meri Jhansi doongi nahin !!" 19. 
19 Dalhousie's Administration, Vol. II. 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER IV AYODHYA We have no hesitation in saying that Lord Dalhousie is one of those Indian administrators who are accused of more sing of administration than they are really guilty of. Officers like Dalhousie are nothing more than mouthpieces of tyrany. They merely execute the commands of the 'Home' authorities. To refer all responsibility for tyrannous misdeeds committed in India to such mouth-pieces would be as unjust as it is irrational. Dalhousie was purely a creature of the circumstances in which he was placed. The major portion of the responsibility, for good as well as for evil, therefore, rests on those who created the situation. As long as the general policy is dictated from 'Home', those whose duty is merely to execute it can act no more honestly than Dalhousie did. It would certainly be unjust to hold Dalhousie responnsible for all those combined acts and deeds which had to flow directly from the situation created for him by his masters in England and his assistants in India. Dalhousie merely reaped that harvest of political robbery the seeds of which had been sedulously sown for a hundred years by his predecessors. The intrigues born of political avarice had been sown long before and Dalhousie's regime was the season in which they bore fruit. But for this heritage of iniquitous power behind him, how many kingdoms could Dalhousie have annexed? It was chiefly because generations of his predecessors had prepared the way for him by slowly undermining the foundations of the different kingdoms of India that Dalhousie was enabled, by the mere stroke of his pen, to annex so many of them. 
It was in 1764 that the relations between the Company and the ruler of Outh were first established. Since then, the servants of the Company had been steadily trying to usurp the fertile land of Ayodhya. Having first compelled the Nabob of Oudh to keep English regiments in his pay for 'protecting' him, they obtained from him in return Rs. 16 lakhs (160,000) per 
annum as the pay for these regiments. By such forced protection and voluntary compulsion, the treasury of the Nabob was rapidly emptied; and then the English suggested to the Nabob (it was a veiled command) that a replacing of all the native army of the Nabob by English regiments would be a valuable step towards the effectual 'protection' of the principality. A treasury which could not afford to pay even the pay of the "subsidised troops" could certainly not pay the salaries of the "additional" troops forced on the Nabob, and the English thoroughly knew this fact. Indeed, the additional demand was made because the English knew this fact. At last it was forced (most unwillingly!) upon the notice of the Company that, if the Nabob had an empty treasury, he had at least a tract of territory and, so, with the sold object of looking after the welfare and well-being of the Nabob, the Companydeprieved him, at once and for ever, of a territory yielding a new revenue of about two crores of Rupees ( 2,000,000) and forced him to accept the services of this extensive army of English soldiers. This territory was the land of Rohilkhand and the Doab. 
After robbing all this land from the territory of Oudh, the English signed an agreement that, as the Nabob had surrendered all and every right over this tract of land, the rest of the territory belonging to the Nabob should remain hereditarily in the family of the Nabob. Another article in the treaty provided that the Nabob should not oppress his subjects. After this treaty which was concluded in 1801, the Nabob was made to advance to the Company, whenever they wanted financial aid, crores of Rupees. The whole kingdom of Oudh was in the hands of the Compoany's army officers, the treasury became empty by forced loans and contributions, and it was impossible for the Nabob to administer his territory independently or to introduce internal reforms. But the philanthropic Company kept on urging upon him, pointing to the articles in the treary of 1801, to alter his administration so as to make his subjects happy and contended. How was it possible for the Nabob to do so ? The Company 
thwarted all his efforts to reform the finances. Those old laws in the kingdom which esured the happiness of the people were abolished by the Company and new ones were introduced. The subjects so much in consequence of these new laws that even the Company had to acknowledge its mistake and did do so ten years after. Thus, while on the one hand the Company unlawfully interfered in the internal administration of the kingdom, on the other hand it insisted that the subjects of the Nabob should have no complaints. They first made him empty his treasury to satisfy their exorbitant demands; and when, to satisfy their further demands which they insisted on being satisfied at once, the Nabob taxed his subjects, down comes the Company on the Nabob's poor devoted head and charges him with maladministration, because, forsooth, the subjects complained against the new taxes. The Nabob's administration was thus paralysed, but, at the same time, if by any chance the people, with one voice, rose against the injustice and attempted to get a reform of the constitution, English bayonets and swords of the "subsidised" troops were ever ready to smother the united voice of the nation. And still, the Company persisted in requiring that there should be no complaints in the kingdom ! Thus, while on the one hand they rendered it more and more impossible either for the Nabob or the people to reform the administration in any way, on the other hand their strict and persistent demands for a better administration grew steadily louder and louder ! "As a matter of fact, the true and effectual way for the introduction of an administration which would render the people happy would have been to call the British Resident back and to given the Nabob a free hand in the administration of his dominion. Thus, the whole guilt of the unrest in his territory rests on the head of the Company".20 Such is the clear and unmistakable evidence of Lord Hastings. But in spite of this, the Company threatened that, if the Nabob did not render his administration conducive to 
20 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p.152. 
the happiness of his subjects, the Company would consider it a violationof the treaty of 1801. 
This treaty of 1801 was cancelled and the Nabob entered into a fresh agreement in 1837. This treaty impaired the authority of the Nabob considerably, but he signed the new agreement simply with the intention of rescuing himself from the cunning treaty of 1801. In the year 1847, Wajid Ali Shah succeeded to the throne of Oudh. This new Nabob determined from the first to destroy the poisonous white worm which was killing the life out of the state, and with that object began reforms in the army which was the life of the kingdom. This youthful prince introduced strict regulations as to the discipline of the Sepoys and even personally supervised their drill. All the regiments had to undergo the drill every morning before the Nabob, who used to dress in the uniform of the commander-in-shift of the troops. He issued strict orders that every regiment that was late in presenting itself on the parade ground should be liable to a fine of Rs.2000 ( 200) and he, at the same time, bound himself to pay the same amount as fine if he himself failed in this duty.21 The Company, of course, could not bear to see the Nabob develop his strength. The British Resident, therefore in a short time forced the Nabob to give up these military activities and at the same time suggested that, if he so desired to increase the strength of the army, the Company was quite willing to increase the "subsidiary" force; the only condition they would impose being that the Nabob should, every year, pay a further additional sum towards its expenses and upkeep. The hotblooded Nabob was quite indignant. But he was forced to give up his darling scheme of military reform and was reduced to complete inactivity. Yet, the benevolent East India Company went on arguing that the Nabob should render his administration happy to his subjects. 
21 Native Narratives of the Mutiny by Metcalfe, pp.32-33. 
But now, the Nabob need ot even think as to how to render his rule happy. For Lord Dalhousie has arrived in India with the express and benevolent object of taking upon himself (as representative of the E.I.Coy.) all the responsibility for the good administration of all the independent states of India. With his keen political insight, Lord Dalhousie soon realised that the treaty of 1837 was, as a matter of fact, a great blunder. For in the annulment of the old treaty was lost a very strong and a very hypercritical reason for the annexation of the idependent principality of Oudh. The article in the treaty of 1801, demanding that the Nabob should rule for the happiness of his subjects, was an incontrovertible argument for annexing Oudh at the sweet will of the Company. How could this mistake of 1837 be repaired ? Why, by simply denying the fact that the treaty was ever entered into. Without any indirect methods, the Nabob was informed that no such treaty as the one of 1837 was ever entered into. A short time after the treaty of 1837, the English, as it would appear, remembered the treaty perfectly well. Indeed in 1847, Loard Hartington had publicly and unmistakably acknowledged this treaty. Col.Sleeman in 1851 had further testified to the treaty. Nay, in that very year 1853, not only was mention made of this treaty, but it was actually appended to the list of the existing treaties in the Company's records for that year !22 So the English denied, aye, altogether, that there was ever any such treaty : - the very existence of a treaty which they had acknowledged just a minute before was denied by them even before the pen which had written the acknowledgment had been laid down ! And thus, Wajid Ali Shah was informed that the Company would consider it necessary to take over the administration of his kingdom if he did not introduce the happy regime ! 
But it must not be forgotten that all these important issues had been decided on long before Dalhousie even reached the shores of Hindusthan. All his predecessors, moved by unholy designs, had prepared 
22 Dalhousie's Administration, Vol.II, p.367. 
the way to swallow this province, and their endeavours, characterised by low cunning, had almost succeeded. To Dalhousie was reserved the last act of consummation, the last stroke of policy and this absorbed all his attention. It would have been out of the question to "conquer" Oudh by sending an expedition into the territory as was done in the case of the Panjab or Brahmadesh (Burma), for as yet not a single man in the Oudh territory was for the English. The charge that the Nabab did not carry out the friendly 
intentions he professed was also out of the question, for had not the Nabob helped the English on all occasions, when help was needed ? And had not the Nabob freely supplied the English with money from his pocket ? Had he not supplied the English even with provisions, when they were pressed hard in many of their campaigns ? 
Nor could there be any excuse, as in the case of Nagpur, that the Nabob had no direct heir; the palace was full of the Nabob’s legitimate children. Nor was there trouble about adoption as in the case of Jhansi, for the present king was the legitimate son of the late king and had, further, sat on the throne for years. In short the Nabob of Oudh had not committed any of the above “crimes” which cost other princes their kingdoms. But though the Nabob had thus avoided every other “crime”, still the demented fool had committed one unpardonable crime ! What crime could cry louder than this, that the land of Oudh was very fertile, teeming with crops and rich in every way ? Even the dry language of the Blue Book has broken forth into poetic eloquence when describing the beautiful and rich land of Oudh ! 
The Blue Book says :- “In this beautiful land, everywhere within twenty feet, and in some placed even within ten feet, of the surface, there is a plentiful supply of water. This splendid tract is most charming, nodding with whole forests of tall and towering bamboo trees, cooled by the share of mango trees and green with rich and verdant crops. The deep shade of the tamarind, the fragrance of the orange trees, the rich hue of the fig trees, and the sweet all-pervading scent of the pollen of flowers lend an additional glory to a scene naturally beautiful!” 
That no wise Englishman should hesitate to pull down a Nabob who was guilty of such an enormity as possessing such a beautiful tract of territory all for himself, Dalhousie realised but too well and so, in the year 1856, the fiat went forth that Oudh was to be annexed. And what was the reason alleged ? Of course this, that the Nabob was not reforming his administration. But, England couldst justify thy rule over India for a day, if thou acknowledgest the plea of unrest and maladministration as sufficient ? There is the vice of opium-eating in China, absolute rule in Afghanisthan, why, under thy very nose Russia has reached a climax of lawlessness and tyranny; yet couldst thou dare for that reason to drag the Chinese Emperor 
and the Amir and the Tsar from their thrones and annex their kingdoms ? How couldst though acquire the right of gagging the mouth of your neighbour and binding his hands and feet and taking possession of his house, because, forsooth, he kept his things not quite in proper order? Even the treaty of 1801 did not give the Company the right of annexing Oudh under any circumstances. And was not that very absence of good administration, at which the Company pretended so much indignation, a thing brought about by their own agency? Arnold, the biographer of Dalhousie and the historian of his regime, asserts that the Nabob of Oudh was guilty of many a crime basides that ! In the first place, he used to give presents of shawls to his servants of either sex; further that he has a fireworks display on the 11th of May; why, more - one morning he urged Shah Begum and Taj Begum to a dinner ! What more horrible crime could he commit ? All thanks to the English who bore patiently such gross acts on the part of the Nabob as taking medicinal drugs in the mornings, and desisted from dethroning him! But the patience of the English could endure no more ! For, one day the Nawab was present when some stallions were let on the mares for breeding purposes. 
It is a wonder that malicious as the English historians were, trying hard to noise far and wife the incapacity of the Nabob for good administration, by such silly, trifling accusations, they should have taken the trouble to come to Hindusthan to witness such occurrences as these. Even in their own country, throughout the various royal palaces, they could have gathered enough material of worst nature; and in that case, their time would certainly have been more profitably employed in annexing and confiscating the estates of their own princes and lords, in order to put an end to violations and outrages of a far more nefarious kind! 
As soon as the British Resident received the order that the Nabob should be informed of the decision of Dalhousie - a lasting stain on his regime - the Resident went to the Nabob's palace and began to insist that the Nabob should sign a document stating that he was perfectly willing to give over his dominions to the Company. The Nabob read the document and flatly refused to sign. To make the Nabob sign this document, the Resident began attempts to bribe the Ranee and the Vizier and the threat was also given that a refusal by the Nabob to sign the document would result in even his pension being stopped. The Nabob was overwhelmed with grief at this and began even to weep. But it was of no use. Seeing at the end of three days that the refusal was still persisted in, the British army, insolently setting aside the Nabob's authority, entered Lucknow and took forcible possession of the whole Ryasat, including his palace. The Zenanas were looted, the Begums were insulted, the Nabob was hurled from the throne, palaces were turned into stables for the soldiers of the English and thus began a happy beginning of the good administration of the so-far-badly-managed Kingdom of Oudh. 
Though the ruling prince of Oudh was a Mahomedan, most of the big land-owners under him were Hindus. Jahgirs and Talukdari rights had continued from father to son in the families of these Zemindars for generations. Hundreds of villages were administered under the single authority of each of these proprietors. They possessed forts and had small armies under them to protect these Jahgirs. No wonder, then, that these Zemindars very soon incurred the displeasure of the Company. With a view 
to reduce all to the same level of poverty, the sordid roller of the Company's land revenue administration began to devastate the land. The Talukdars were deprived of their numerous villages wholesale, their lands were confiscated, their forts were demolished, and all over the land of Ayodhya one long wail of suffering rent the air ! The Amir of yesterday became a Fakir to-day. The descendants of ancient and noble families were driven from village to village at the behest of a raw white youth of yesterday; insults were everywhere given; whole families were reduced to dust.23 
The English claimed that they were doing these things for the poor agriculturists and villagers. Tyrannous land-owners oppressed the Ryot; hence, these protectors of the Ryot were introducing new methods to deliver the Ryot from the cruel grip of the landowner. How many Ryots and how many villagers were deceived by these false pretensions will soon be witnessed on the battle-fields of Ayodhya. Fahtiful villagers, attached to their masters, used to visit these homeless Zemindars and Taklukdars, robbed and driven from door to door, and used to pay them faithful homage in the profuse flow of sincere tears. Thus, there was terrible suffering - right from the Nabob of Oudh to the villagers; not a place but witnesses wholesale looting, even burning, misery, oppression, and tyranny, and did not hurl terrible curses and vowed vengeance; not a homestead but looked desolate, terribly desolate! Such was the beneficient administration that was substituted in Oudh for the misgovernment of the Nabob ! 
The world-wide difference between Swarajya and foreign rule was, thus, brought painfully to the notice of all Oudh. All their previous 
23 Kaye says with reference to the Zemindar :- The chances against him were many and great, for he 
had divers ordeals to pass through and he seldom survived them all. When the claims of a great 
Talukdar could not be altogether ignored, it was declared that he was a rogue or a fool.... They gave 
him a bad name and they straightway went to ruin him It was at once a cruel wrong and a grave 
error to sweep it away as though it were an encumbrance and an usurpation. 
history stood before them vividly. They realised full well know that even death was preferable to living in slavery. How long to look on, while the Swadesh was reduced to dust and Swarajya was no more? They hated intensely these results and this shameful condition. 
At this very time, the roller of the Inam Commission was working in other provinces in order to destroy the stamina of Zemindars and Vatandars in those provinces and reduce them to the level of those classes in Oudh. Those lands and those Jahgirs which had been won by the Sanad of the Sword were being abolished wholesale, because they could not show documentary evidence of Sanads of paper. That the work of the Inam Commission was terrible may, to some extent, be realised from this single fact that nearly 35000 big Jahgirs and extensive Inams were inquired into by the Inam Commission and of these, within the space of ten years, three-fifths were usurped! By this means, all over India, property of every kind was rendered insecure. Thrones of princes, Vatans of Sardars, lands of Zemindars, Talukas of Talukdars, houses of citizens, the lands dedicated to the temples, the fields of agriculturists - all these were, in this terrible conflagration, burned to ashes. Even life was rendered insecure. No one could be sure that the few morsels of food which he was allowed to-day would be spared to him to-morrow. The contrast between Swarajya and foreign government, independence and slavery, stood naked in all its horrible aspects before the people. 
Thus did the English Administrator benevolently in this extraordinary way these vast dominions of our Indian princes which had been so far badly administered ! 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER V ADDING FUEL TO FIRE 
To allow the existance of a slavery under which such unjust acts of oppression (as have been mentioned in the last chapter) and hundreds of other unmentionable crimes (which have been left unmentioned, being, indeed, too numerous to mention) are committed and encouraged and to bow the head in submission to the perpetrators thereof, is not this the very destruction of Religion ? What religion is there which has not condemned dependence and slavery? The ultimate goal of true religion is likeness unto the nature of the Supreme Being that moves everything, of Him who made all beings capable of becoming all-perfect. There must not be imperfection in ma if he is to be like the All-Perfect. But how can there be anything but imperfection in a country where there is slavery ? God is the essence of justice, and slavery is absence of justice. God is the essence of freedom; slavery is absence of freedom. Hence, where there is God there cannot be slavery, and where there is slavery there cannot be God or Godliness. Where there is no place for God, there can be no religion. In short, true religion cannot exist where slavery, the nursery of injustice, is rampant. Slavery is the straight road to Hell and true religion is a means of attaining Heaven. To walk in the path leading towards Heaven, the shackles of slavery must be broken. This was the practical philosophy which Sri Samartha Ramdas gave to Shivaji and Sri Pran Nath taught Chhatrasala and this advice to win Swaraj for the sake of religion, by fighting and dying for it, began to echo in the hearts of the people trodden under slavery, in 1857, two hundred years after it was originally given. 
Those, who had thrust this slavery - unnatural, born of injustice, - on Hindusthan, had already begun the destruction of religion not only in India but all over the world. For, that religion is there which has not condemned injustice ? But not satisfied with the tacit insult of the religion of 
India from the very day he set foot on the Indian soil up to the terrible battles of 1857, the Feringhi has been making steady and unceasing attempts to trample the Hindu religion and the Moslem faith. The head of the whole English nation was turned at the immeasurable success which had attended the attempt to Christianise (?) the indigenous ignorant races of Africa and America, and they had strong hopes that in India too, in a few days, the Cross would be everywhere triumphant. That the English fully believed that Hindusthanis would be ashamed of their religion when they saw the light of western civilisation and give it up, that they would consider the Bible more sacred than the Vedas and the Koran, and that they would be gathered together in the fold of the Church, leaving their Temples and Musjids, - is fully and unmistakably seen from the literature of that time and from the writings and speeches of Englishmen of the first half of the last century. The chairman of the Directors of the East India Company, Mr. Mangles, said in the House of Commons, in 1857 :- 
"Providence has entrusted the extensive empire of Hindusthan to England in order that the banner of Christ should wave triumphant from one end of India to the other. Everyone must exert all his strength that there may be no dilatoriness on any account in continuing in the country fire grand work of making all India Christian." 
Macaulay, in 1936 - when schools in which English education was to be given were first opened in Bengal, had expressed a hope amounting almost to a conviction that, in thirty years, there would be no idol-worshipper left I Bengal.24 
24 "It is my firm belief that, if our plan of educatio is followed up, there would not be a single 
idolator in Bengal 30 years hence !" - Macaulay's letter to his mother, Oct.12, 1836. Rev. Kennedy 
wrote at the time, "Whatever misfortunes come on us, as long as our Empire in India continues, so 
long as our Empire in India continues, so long let us not forget that our chief work is the propagation 
of Christianity in the land. Until Hindusthan, from Cape Comorin to the Himalayas, embraces the 
religion of Christ and until it condemns the Hindu and the Moslem religions, our efforts must 
The mind of the Feringhi was filed with such contempt and such hatred for the Hindu and Moslem faiths - the two principal religions of India - that very prominent writers, forgetting even ordinary conventionalities, constantly heaped shameful abuse on the two religions whenever they got a change. 
The constant insistence by the East Indian Company to make India Christian was due to a very obvious reason. Once the religions of India died, the national feeling of the people would also die; individuality would die and it is infinitely more easy to rule a nation whose individuality is dead than to rule one which has a clearly marked individuality. Thus, the question was one of diplomacy rather than of religion, and the reason why England did not lift the sword for the solution of the problem was also to be found in diplomacy. England had learnt many lessons from the history of Aurangzeb. Both the strength and weakness of the policy of that monarch had been carefully studied by the English. Learning the wisdom of Aurangzeb, that the destruction of the religion of a conquered race makes the problem of retaining it in perpetual slavery much easier, the English had avoided his folly of open persecution for religion. Hence the stolid and continuous efforts of the English to make India Christian by indirect means only and not openly. 
No wonder, then, that every citizen of India – seeing that English authorities and missionaries were using such language openly – began to feel that, under the English Raj, everyone would eventually be forced to be Christian. With the disappearance of Swaraj, the Rajas and 
continue persistently. For this work, we must make all the efforts we can and use all the power and 
all the authority in our hands; and continuous and unceasing efforts must be kept on until India 
becomes a magnificent nation, the bulwark of Christianity in the East! If, with such 
uninterrupted preseverance, we continue our efforts, then I do not doubt that by the 
grace of God, we shall be successful in the end!” 
Maharajas who made rich gifts of Inams and Jahgirs to Temples and Musjids, were also disappearing. In this powerless state, - instead of new inams being granted, instead of fresh gifts of money being showered on Temples and Musjids as when where was Swaraj – even those Inams and the money remaining yet in their hands were being taken away forcibly from the temples and mosques. And there is no wonder that, seeing that there was no protection for their religions, the Hindus and the Moslems alike were pained and grieved. Nor is it to be wondered at that the blood of both the Hindus and the Mahomedans boiled with rage at being openly described in official and private documents as “heathens,” and peculiarly abusive epithet. And yet, there was every indication that the Feringhis, who cared more for the increase of commerce than of the Christian religion and were the devotees more of Mammon than of Christ – the Prince of Poverty, would therefore desist from attacking the religious prejudices of the people by open violence. As if with the express purpose of proving the falsity of such an idea, the English in the insolence born of unbridled power very soon began an open and violent interference with the religions of Hindusthan. Even while efforts were being made to pass in Calcutta the law for the abolition of suttee, public opinion in India began to suspect deeper designs on the part of the Government. Even before this law for the abolition of suttee had passed through the Councils of Calcutta, the prisoners were prevented from observing their religions. A few days more saw the passing of the Widow Remarriage Act, in the face of the loud protests of the Hindus. No sooner had this law been passed than Lord Canning expressed his opinion that the law for the abolition of polygamy was to be brought into the Legislative Council, and he exerted himself to pass it as speedily as possible through the council. The question we have to answer here is not whether the law which the Company was going to introduce was good or bad. What we want, in this place, to say is that neither Hindus nor Mahomedans could be certain as to where the attack on their religious customs would stop, seeing that the English, in the exercise of their authority for the passing of these laws, had 
begun the dangerous habit of interfering by force with the religious customs of the people. These laws may be good or bad; nor may it be necessary to attach to them the slightest importance; but this much is clear that any changes in the social habits based upon religious texts can be brought about only by the authority of those religious and through their adherents. When a foreign administration professing an alien religion, after making promises never to interfere with the religious beliefs of the people, endeavours to change by force the hereditary customs, the established religious beliefs of the people, on the strength of a majority composed of men professing the foreign religion, in the council and on the strength of despotic authority, and that, when the public opinion clearly and unmistakably expressed, of the adherents of those religions was opposed to such change, while, in the Council, the men who belonged to these religions has no authority at all, - then, indeed there was not the least difference between the tyranny of Aurangzeb and the tyranny of the Company's Raj. To-day law regarding only suttee has been passed; who could say that, when this injustice was swallowed by the people, what other laws the Company would not pass ? The English hated idolatry as much as they did suttee. To-day the law for the abolition of suttee was forced on the people against their will; who knows that, to-morrow, a law for the prevention of idol-worship would not be thrust on the people under the pretext of reform ? One injustice begets another. To allow the continuance of this system of interfering with religion by means of laws made by aliens was to follow the lifting of the sword of Aurangzeb. And when the English had begun to take up the role of Aurangzeb, there was no other remedy than that India must produce a Shivaji or a Guru Govind. And such was the usual impression all over India. 
And this idea the Christian missionaries began to strengthen themselves. In their street preachings at various places, they used to say openly that India would soon be Christainised. The Sirkar had already begun to pass one law after another to destroy the foundations of the Hindu and Mahomedan religions. Railways had already been constructed, and carriages 
had been built in such a way as to offend the caste prejudices of the Hindus. The larger mission schools were being helped with huge grants from the Sirkar. Lord Canning himself distributed thousands of Rupees to every mission, and from this fact it is clear that the wish was strong in the heart of Lord Canning that all India should be Christian. Why, if the would- be converts and afraid that they would lose their property by conversion, a law shall be at once be passed to prevent this ! 
Hardly had the missionaries exhausted their sermons and lectures, when news came that a law had been passed that all the rights and privileges of converts to the property of their unconverted relatives should remain intact even after conversion. Another fact also came to light, that huge salaries were to be paid to the bishops and even archbishops from the Indian treasury. The insistence of every Englishman, from the highest officer in the Government to the commonest missionary of the towns, had reached such a pitch that the white superior in Government offices began to insist on all the "black" clerks under him to become Christian ! While the officers were ready to lay the axe at the root of India's religions, at the expense of India's money, themselves living on the fat of India - the Government did not move at all in the matter. For, what was the Government but Lord Canning and his councillors ? And, this Canning and this Council had surpassed all other officers in their holy zeal for conversion and were feeding the missionaries with lakhs of Rupees - those missionaries who defiled the people and heaped unrestrained abuse on their sacred religions. Under such circumstances, the people were reasonably afraid that a greater danger was in store for their religion under the British Raj. The English missionaries tried to allay the terrible unrest by an attempt to christianise the sepoys, the chief strength of the people of India, believing that the disaffection of the ordinary people would be no danger to them at all. That the low cunning of this trick was plainly understood by the people will be seen unmistakably from the proclamations of the "Multineers". That the complaints and grievances mentioned in these proclamations are literally 
true can be collected even from the reluctant confessions of the English historians themselves. Except in the time of actual warfare, all days were days of leisure to the Sepoys. How were these days of leisure utilised by colonels and captains and other officers in the English army ? Why, in cosistantly poisoning the ears of the Sepoys with talks on Christianity! Do you think even this preaching was conducted in simple and decorous language? Not at all. Abuse, unrestrained filthy abuse, was heaped on the name of Rama Chandra, the sacred name, the mere mention of which makes the heart of every Hindu fill with love and with devotion, and on the name of Mahomed, the very mention of whose name fills all Moslems with reverence and awe. The Koran and the Vedas were openly defiled and images were desecrated! If any Sepoy retaliated on these fiendish Feringhis and returned abuse for abuse, the poor Sepoy's roti and ghee would be taken away by the authority of the missionary colonels. Why, very soon things came to such a pass that living in the English barracks meant the sacrifice of one's religion. For, if any Sepoy accepted the Christian religion he was praised loudly and treated honourably; and this Sepoy was promoted in the ranks and his salary increased, in the face of the superior merits of the other Sepoys ! A soldier renegade giving up his religion became a Hawaldar and a Hawaldar, untrue to his religion, was promoted to be a Subahdar Major! 25 Seeing that the Sepoys in the army were poor, ignorant, and short-sighted; feeling that when the military was christianised, the christianising of the people was once a question of time; considering the question every way, the English had come to the conclusion that the chief attack must be delivered on the Sepoy in the army. And in accordance with this opinion, from many directions, secret and open attacks on the Hindu and Moslem faiths had already begun to be delivered. Not only that, but some commanders and colonels did not hesitate even to declare publicly, through newspapers, that they had entered the army with the express purpose and object of destroying the religion of the Sepoy. 
25 Causes of the Mutiny by a Bengali Hindu. The Commander of the Bengal Infantry himself writes in the Government Report that he had been continuing uninterruptedly for 28 years the policy of christianising the military and that it was a part of military duty to save the souls of heathens from Satan! Who could dare to say that the fears of the Sepoy were unreasonable as to the impossibility of preserving their religion in the face of the attempts to undermine it, continued day and night by these padre heroes who stumped the country with port-folios of military orders on the one hand, and the Bible in the other ? Everywhere there was a strong conviction that the Government had determined to destroy the religions of the country and make Christianity the paramount religion of the land. 
An Englishman, to show how the hatred of the Feringhi was raging tumultuously in the hearts of both Hindus and Mahomedans, says :- "A Moulvie of my acquaintance, living outwardly on terms of intimacy with me, was on his death-bed. I was with him at the time and I asked him what was his last wish before he died. He looked very disconsolate and gloomy at this question. On being asked why he looked so gloomy, he said, 'Truly, I assure you that I repent exceedingly that I did not kill even two Feringhis in my life!' On another occasion a resectable and learned Hindu said boldly, 'We wish you to be gone and our native rule to be established, that we may continue in the ways of our fathers!' "26 
While this tumult of disaffection was raging everywhere Dalhousie himself made a further attack on the Hindu religion. Even English historians who consider it their duty to support all the actions of the Government find it impossible to support this enormity. When the civilised Christian hero, Dalhousie, came forward to trample under foot the noble custom of adoption, one of the tenderest, most noble, loving, and sacred commandments of the Hindu Dharma Shastras and endeared to the people of all ages all over India, all India from one end to the other was shocked. The 
26 Rev Kennedy, M.A. 
magazine required only a lighted match to explode with violence and this act of Dalhousie supplied it. To add fuel to this raging fire, orders were issued to the Indian sepoys that they should use the new cartridges ! Soon after the promulgation of the order for using new cartridges for the new rifles, factories were opened for the manufacture of these cartridges in various places. A certain kind of fat had to be used for the greasing of these cartridges so that they might be smooth and well-lubricated, and orders soon followed that the sepoys should bite off this greasy portion with their teeth instead of tearing it away with hands as formerly. Immediately afterwards schools were even opened that the sepoys might learn how to use these rifles and also how to bite the cartridges with their teeth, and the Government reports from various quarters stated that the sepoys were immensely pleased with the long range of these new rifles. 
One day, a Brahmin Sepoy belonging to the village of Dum- Dum, very near Calcutta, was going to the military barracks with his Lota full of water. At that instant, a scavenger came and asked to drink from the Lota. The Brahmin replied that his Lota would be rendered unclean by his touch. The scavenger replied, “Enough of caste pride now ! Do you not know that soon you would bite with your teeth the flesh of the cow and the fat of the pig ? The new cartridges are being expressly greased with these materials for this purpose! “ when he heard this, the Brahmin ran wild with excitement towards the camp, as if the very devil was in him; and in a few minutes, the sepoys became excites – a crown of mad men! – and horrible whisperings were in the air. Suspicions arose that the Feringhis had arranged a cunning plot to defile their religions by greasing the cartridges with cows’ blood and pigs’ fat. The Sirkar replied that, far from such a plot being devised by them, the very story that the cartridges were greased with cows' blood and pigs' fat was absolutely without foundation! 
Who was it then that spoke the lie ? Was it the Sirkar or the sepoys ? If the cartridges were really greased with cows' blood and pigs' fat, was it the result of mere ignorance or of conscious purpose on the part of the Government? That the English did not know with what material the 
cartridges were greased cannot be held for a moment. For in 1853, when these cartridges were introduced for the first time and when "native" sepoys from Cawnpore, Rangoon, Fort William and other places, not suspecting that unclean things had been used in their manufacture, has bitten off these cartridges with full confidence in their superiors, even then the English authorities knew with what the cartridges were greased. In December 1853, Col.Tucker has mentioned this fact very clearly in the Government reports.27 Why, even the Commander-in-Chief knew the fact and, in spite of this, the very things prohibited by the two religions were used and even factories for their manufacture were opened right in India! After ascertaining well this fact from the low caste Indians working in those factories, the sepoys of Barrackpore spread this news all over India. Even lightning travels not so quick! Within a fortnight, not a Hindu or a Mahomedan but was talking of cartridges and nothing but cartridges, wherever he was. And the stronger this public indignation grew, the stronger and more frequent grew the assertions on the part of the authorities, from the Governor-General down to the lowest white soldier, that the story of the cartridges was a mere fabrication. 
These statements of the Feringhi Government were not only absolutely false, but they were put forward deliberately with the knowledge that they were false. The fact that the very Commander-in-Chief was aware of four years before, was now being openly denied by the Government. That in the factory at Dum-Dum cartridges were not greased with cows' and pigs' fat, that the ignorant and superstitious sepoys had started this wholly unfounded rumour- such were the assertions of the English historians until a very recent date. But now, there does not seem to be the slightest doubt that the Government was well aware of this fact. The contractor who had undertaken to supply the fat for the cartridges had, in clear words, made a distinct agreement in his contract deed, drawn at that very time, to supply 
27 Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p.380 
cows' fat. The agreement was that the cartridges should be greased with the fat of the cow, the Sacred Mother, buying the same at the rate of two pence (two annas) per pound. And the sepoys should bite these cartridges with their teeth! When this cunning scheme was exposed, the Feringhi Government immediately issued orders that, thereafter, whatever fat was to be used for the cartridges should be only from sheep or goats, and that cows' and pigs' fat should never be used. If these orders mean anything they mean that so far the cartridges were being greased with cows' and pigs' fat. It was necessary for them to issue this new regulation because they knew this fact. From the Government documents published by Forrest it is clear beyond a doubt that, in the fat used for the cartridges, cows' and pigs' fat was mixed, and that this fact was known to the highest english autorities in the land.28 And when the sepoys refused to bite these cartridges, the Feringhi military authorities used to swear that this was altogether false. Not only that, but they were threatened with severe punishment if they refused to obey the military orders through their silly prejudices. But when, regardless of these threats, it appeared that the sepoys were going to dare everything for the protection of their Dharma, then the Sirkar quietly retreated back and yielded on one point, allowing the sepoys to use a certain paper instead of fat. But what guarantee was there that a Government which could stoop to the meanness of using pigs’ and cows’ fat would not use some other mean trick of the same nature to make the paper substituted for the lubricating mixture smooth? If once unconsciously they were defiled with cows’ and pigs’ meat thrust in their mouths, then the missionary colonels and padre commanders 
28 Says Yake : "There is no question that beef fat was used in the composition of this 
tallow." (Vol.I,p.381). Says Lord Roberts: "The recent researches of Mr.Forrest in the 
records of the Government of India prove that the lubricating mixture used in preparing 
the cartridges was actually composed of the objectionable ingredients, cows' fat and lard 
and the incredible disregard of the soldiers' religious prejudices was displayed in the 
manufacture of these cartridges." - Forty Years in India, p.431. 
would say, “Look here, you have now been christianised!” If, on the one hand, the military superiors tried to soothe the indignation and anger of the sepoys by false denials and lowly retractations, on the other hand, they provoked them still more by distributing on the parades thousands of big pamphlets full of abuse of Rama and Mahomed to spite their religions. The beginning of the agitation against the cartridges was started early in January and, before the month had ended, the Government had to yield on yet another point – a fresh regulation allowed the soldiers to use the fat they themselves prepared. Further, Birch, at the same time, by means of another Government memorandum, assured all the sepoys that not a single objectionable cartridge had been sent into the army! The Prince of Lies could not have been more versatile! Twenty-two thousand and five-hundred cartridges from the Umballa depot alone and fourteen thousand from the Sialkot depot had been already sent in 1856! In the rifle classes in various places, even at that very moment, practice in the use of these cartridges was being given! In the Gurkha Regiments, the cartridges were being openly introduced! And military authorities used to threaten the sepoys that they would be physically forced to use the cartridges. Why, in one or two places, when the sepoys were obstinate in their refusal to use these cartridges, whole regiments were punished severely. 
So, the sepoys determined that, whether they had to use these cartridges or not, they would not rest quiet until they had destroyed this political slavery and this dependence which was at the root of all this trouble. What religion can a slave have? The first step towards Dharma is to be a free man of a free country. 
Rise, then, O Hindusthan, rise! Even as Shri Ramdas exhorted "Die for Dharma; while dying, kill all your enemies and win back Swarajya; while killing, kill well." Murmuring such sentiments to himself, every sepoy in India began to sharpen his sword for the fight for Sradharma and Swarajya! 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER VI LIT UP THE SACRIFICIAL FIRE 
It is then inevitable that we must resist sword in hand and wage a relentless struggle to win back our political independence and to safeguard the honour of the ashes of our fathers and the temples of our gods. We must hence hasten first to propitiate the God of War, the Lord of Hosts, even as Indrajit did before he marched on to the battlefield, as the 'Puranas' tell us, to secure the unconquerable Chariot which he expected to appear forth out of the blazing Sacrificial Fire. True it is that Indrajit was foiled in his attempt to secure it b ecause unrighteous was his cause. But our cause is just, is righteous! We need not fear frustration. Even though we know that to fight for what we call Right does not unfailingly win though its inherent justificability or righteousness unless and until it is upheld by proportionate Might, even then to fight for our Right to the best of our might is in itself a heroic joy which fills the warrior with a divine intoxication. 
Lit up the Sacrificial Fire then, for we must propitiate the Lord of Hosts, the God for War! 
Dig the Sacrificial Fire-pit on the altar wider and wider, deeper and deeper! Well and good: Lo! The Fire of National Indignation is already bursting forth into flames! As the first sacramental rite, the Sankalpa, the declamatory vow, has already been proclaimed a hundred years ago as earli as the year 1757 A.D. So, as the first sacrificial offering, throw the Field of Plassey into the flaming pit! 
Where is the Kohinoor of the Panjab? Here has Dalhousie himself offered to help us and brought it, snatching it away from its rightful owner the Khalsa of Guru Govindsingh! What sacrificial offering can be more igniting the hungry Fire than the Gem of "the purest ray serene", this ancient historical emblem of IndianSovereignty? Throw then, the Kohinoor of Punjab in. 
The next immediate offering must be Burma. So let its King Theeba be exiled and into this crackling Fire pit, throw in the kingdom of Burma too. 
How do you forget the Throne of Shivaji himself? What is the good of its keeping rotting at Satara? We must respect the right of precedence due to it! Help us Oh, obliging Britania by doing your worst with your ravenous claws and relegating the kings there to the graves - where they might yet rule freely - bring here the Maratha throne quick! That the Fire of National indignation may get more and more fed, fat ad fierce, throw the throne of Satara in! 
The Gadi of Nagpur by itself could be but a poor offering for such a wild, warlike God. Hence bring ye, with the Gadi all the empty palaces, elephants, horses and the very anees too, not only with their jewels, rudely robbed but with their shrieks and weepings and wailings and in this Sacrificial Blazing pit throw it all altogether! 
Even though the flames are rising like huge columns leaping forth into the skies higher and higher yet they must be lit still more intensely and fiercely. So throw the lightning of Zansi in! 
Ah! Hear you not now the rambling so deep, so roaring in the bowels of this blazing fire pit, this 'Yadnya-Kund'? Surely some great explosive Revolutionary Birth is getting into line, form and figure! Feed up, Feed up the mighty sacrificial fire with anything and everything that is intensely combustible and at hand. So throw the Nabob of Oudh in! In with the Gadi of Tanjore! In witrh the Nabob of Arcot! Push in Raj Anguli, Sambalpur, all the Talukdars, Jahagirdars, Inamdars, Vatandars in fact all those who can affix a 'Dar' to their titles, depriving them of all their proprietary rights and possessions and making them all 'Nadars' -throw in, throw in! 
And now has come to the time for Dum Dum! Hasten ye all, friends and foes, and bring all the new cartridges in millions from the Dum Dum type factories spread throughout India, dip them in cow's blood, boil 
them in pig's fat and throw them into this all absorbing, all consuming Jaw of Fire! There, from the white-heat point the wild fire has risen to War-heat! 
Dancing on the b lazing flames out of the Sacrificial fire pit, Behold, arises at last the presiding Deity, terrible to look at! Salutes innumerable to Thee, O Ward God, O Lord of Hosts! Under whose fierce insolence tyranny and injustice are ground and burnt to ashes, by the mighty hammer in whose hands the shackles of slavery get knocked down to pieces and Nations are set free and whose hundred and one red hot tongues are lolling out from hundred and one mouths athrist to lick up battlefulls of blood when loaded war clouds burst out on Nations fighting for life, for death, - that aspect of Thee, O spirit of War, O Har- the terrible! We contemplate, we worship! Be propitious! Wilt thou, O Lord, sharpen the edge of our sword and bless it with Victory? 
"If not, perchance, with victory - with Vengeance will I bless your sword !! - yes vengeance, the force deterent, the Nemesis which tyranny dreads like death and which holds in the hollow of its hands the deeds of a Victory to come !!" 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER VII SECRET ORGANISATION 
WHILE the forces of the Revolution were thus maturing themselves all over India, as described in the last chapter, in Brahmavarta a Programme was being prepared as to how to organise properly all the materials for the war so as to bring the War of Independence to a successful conclusion. 
In the third chapter, we left Rango Bapuji and Azimullah Khan holding secret interviews with each other in some London rooms. Though history cannot record the exact conversation the Brahmin of Satara held with the Khan Sahib of Brahmavarta, still, it is as certain as anything can be that the map of the rising was being prepared by these two in London. After leaving London, Rango Bapuji went straight to Satara, but it was not possible for Azimullah Khan to go direct to Hindusthan. The extent of the domonions and the diplomacy of those against whom the war was to be wages were not now confined to Hindusthan alone. Hence, it was necessary to attach the British Empire in as many placed as possible. It was also essential that it should be ascertained from what quarters in Europe direct help or moral sympathy could be expected in the coming War of Independence. With this object, Azimullah Khan made a tour in Europe before returning to India. He want to the capital of the Sultan of Turkey famed throughout the world as the Khalifa of all Moslems. Being informed that, in the Russo- Turkish War then going on, the English had been defeated in the important battle of Sebastopol, he stayed some time in Russia. Many English historians have a suspicion that Azimullah had gone there to ascertain whether Russia would pursue the war against England in Asia, and, if possible, to enter into an offensive and defensive treaty. When the trumpet of National War had been blown, all people openly declared that the Nana had completed a treaty with the Tsar of Russia and the Russian army was 
ready to fight against the Feringhis. If we bear this in mind, the above suspicion is strengthened. When Azimullah was in Russia, he had an interview with the well-known writer Russel, the military correspondent of the London Times. The poor man could not have even dreamt that, immediately after the Turko- Russian War, he would have to send from Hindusthan news of the wonderful activities of his guest. As soon as Azimullah heard the news of the defeat of the English, and that the Russians had beaten back the attach of the united forces of the English and the French on the 18th of June, he obtained admittance into the English camp. His dress was Hindusthani and rich like that of a prince. As soon as Russell came out, Azimullah said to him. "I want to see this famous city and those great Rustoms, the Russians, who have beaten the French and the English together."29 Undoubtedly, Azimullah was a past master in irony and satire. This curiosity on the part of Azimullah to see these brave Rustoms who defeated both the English and the French Russell undertook to satisfy, by inviting him to his tent. On that day, till the shades of sunset closed round them completely, "he was looking with marked interest at the fire of the Russian guns." One cannon-ball of the Russian guns burst right at his feet, but he did not move. The gay Azimullah, before returning home in the evening, said to Russell, "I have my serious doubts whether you could ever capture this strong fortified position." That night, Azim slept in Russell's tent, and he left next day, early in the morning. On the table was left this note :- "Azimullah Khan presents his compliments to Russell, Esq., and begs to thank him most truly for his kind attentions." 
Is is difficult to say where Azimullah went after leaving Russia. Yet, from the mention in the Proclamation of Cawnpore later on, it would 
29 The above account is published in Russell"s Diary, a very well-known book. 
Russell was military correspondent of the London "Times" in the war of 1857. He was 
personally present in most of the affairs that he describes. appear as certain he was trying to put through some diplomatic scheme in Egypt also.30 So, Azimullah then completed his European tour and returned to Brahmavarta. As soon as Azim reached Brahmavarta, the whole political atmosphere of the palace was changed. The Jaripatka which had waves triumphant and victorious all over India lay so long in dust in the palace; the glorious drum of the Peshwas at the beating of which thousands of Mahratta swords had advanced on the battlefields and performed such deeds of wondrous valour, that drum hitherto only sounded melancholy to the ear; and the royal signet of the Peshwas on the sealing of which had depended the fate of the Mogul Empire had so far been lying sealing its own windowhood in the palace. But now all these appeared to be thrilled with extraordinary life. The dust-soiled Jaripatka shone forth again; the old drums which had almost forgotten their martial music were practising again the forgotten military airs; and the regal seals seemed to be eager, extremely eager. The eyes of Shrimant Nana Sahib, "excited like those of a tiger, brilliant and fierce," since the arrival of Azimullah Khan, flashed more fierce from injured pride and shone more brilliant as he drank inspiration from the words of Shri Krishna, "Therefore, get ready for battle." Every 
30 Lord Roberts has come across a genuine letter from Azimullah to the Sultan 
of Turkey about the oppression in Hindusthan. He says regarding this "There were 
numerous letters from his English fiancees and two from a Frenchman .... It seems 
probable that 'les principales choses' to which Lafont hopes to bring satisfactory 
answers were invitations to the disaffected and disloyal in Calcutta and, perhaps, the 
French settlers in Chandernagore to assist in the effort about to be made to throw off 
the British yoke. A portion of the correspondence was unopened and there were several 
letters in Azimullah’s own handwriting. Two of these were to Omar Pasha of 
Constantinople and told of the Sepoy’s discontent and the troubles state of India 
generally.” – Forty Years in India, p. 429. 
corner of Brahmavarta echoed with those eternal words, Tasmat yuddhaya yujyaswa. For, in Swadesh, even in their own Hindusthan, the people have been reduced to be slaves and have foreign masters : the Swaraj is no more, they have lost their natural rights of liberty! All the attempts to win back the country and its independence by conciliation and by money, and by appeal, had so far failed; hence, be ready for war. "If you are killed, you will get to heaven; if you win, you will enjoy the earth; so, be ready for war; you will not be committing any sin thereby" - it was such heavenly inspiration that gave to Nana's eyes extraordinary brilliance!31 He studied the conditions of his country, saw the sufferings of his countrymen, noticed the destruction of his religion and, diagnosing all these chronic symptoms, he came to the conclusion that nothing but the sword could cure that terrible disease of slavery. Though it is not clear what was the ultimate ideal which he set before himself, still, it would appear that, in his opinion, the first thing to do was to drive the English out by unsheathing the sword and thus get independence; and then, to set up an Indian Government under the banner of the united authority of all the Indian princes. Before his eyes rose clear the history of how Swadesh fell into slavery through the turmoil of internecine quarrels. Before him, on one side was the portrait of Shivaji Maharaj, on the other of Baji Rao, his father. By seeing these two pictures side by side, he could well contrast the past glory and the present shame! And, hence, Nana's programme was first to fight a united fight, to make India free and, by removing internecine warfare, to establish the rule of the United State of India which would, thus, take its rightful place in the council of the free nations of the earth. 
31 "Nana's object, then, was to lay the foundation of his future sovereignty at Cawnpore. The mighty power 
exercised by the Peshwas was to be restored; and to himself, thearchitect of his own fortunes, would belong the 
glory of replacing that vanished sceptre. There can be no doubt that some such thoughts influenced him." - 
Trevelyan: p. 133. 
He, also, felt that the meaning of "Hindusthan" was thereafter the united nation of the adherents of Islam as well as Hinduism. As long as the Mahomedans lived in India in the capacity of the alien rulers, so long, to be willing to live with them like brothers was to acknowledge national weakness. Hence, it was, up to then, necessary for the Hindus to consider the Mahomedans as foreigners. And moreover this rulership of the Mahomedans, Guru Govind in the Panjab, Rana Pratap in Rajputana, Chhatrasal in Bundelkhand, and the Maharattas by even sitting upon the throne at Delhi, had destroyed; and, after a struggle of centuries, Hindu sovereignty had defeated the rulership of the Mahomedans and had come to its own all over India. It was no national shame to join hands with Mahomedans then, but it would, on the contrary, be an act of generosity. So, now, the original antagonism between the Hindus and the Mahomedans might be consigned to the Past. Their present relation was one not of rulers and ruled, foreigner and native, but simply that of brothers with the one difference between them of religion alone. For, they were both children of the soil of Hindusthan. Their names were different, but they were all children of the same Mother; India therefore being the common mother of these two, they were brothers by blood. Nana Sahib, Bahadur Shah of Delhi, Moulvi Ahmad Shah, Khan Bahadur Khan, and other leaders of 1857 felt this relationship to some extent and, so, gathered round the flag of Swadesh leaving aside their enmity, now so unreasonable and stupid. In short, the broad feature of the policy of Nana Sahib and Azimullah were that the Hindus and the Mahomedans should unite and fight shoulder to shoulder for the independence of their country and that, when freedom was gained, the United States of India should be formed under the Indian rulers and princes. 
How to achieve this ideal was the one all-absorbing thought of everyone in the place of Brahmavarta. Two things were necessary for the success of this terrible war that was to be waged to win back freedom. The first thing was to create a passionate desire in Hindusthan for this ideal; the second was to make all the country rise simultaneously for the 
purpose of achieving it. To turn India's mind into the channels of freedom and to guide India's hand to strike for freedom, these two things it was necessary to accomplish; and this in such a manner that the Company's government should not suspect anything while the scheme was yet unripe. Not forgetting historical experience but guided by it, a secret organisation was resolved upon and, at once, started at Brahmavarta. 
To obtain all information, about this secret society, either now or in the immediate future, is as difficult as it is to obtain the information about any other secret society. But upon the facts that occasionally come to light, one cannot but admire the skill of the organisers.32 
A little before 1856, Nana began to send missionaries all over India to initiate people into this political ideal. In addition to sending missionaries to awaken the people, Nana also sent tried and able men to the different princes from Delhi to Mysore, to fill their minds with the glorious ideal of the United States of India and to induce them to join in the Revolution. These letters which were sent into every Durbar secretly, clearly pointed out how the English were playing the game of reducing India to insignificance by annexing Swadeshi kingdoms under the pretext of "no heir", how those states which were spared yet would soon be reduced to the same fate as the others and how, under the yoke of slavery, country and religion were both being tramples under foot; and they concluded by exhorting the princes to work for the Revolution which was to make them free. Direct evidence is available that messengers and letters from Nana were sent to the states of Kolhapur and Patwardhan, to the Kings in Oudh, the princes of Bundelkhand, and others. The English arrested one of such messengers at the Durbar of Mysore. The evidence given by this man is so 
32 Trevelyan says in reference to this : "No society of rich and civilised Christians who ever 
undertook to preach the gospel of peace and goodwill can have employed a more perfect system of 
organisation than was adopted by these rascals whose mission it was to preach the gospel of sedition 
and slaughter." - Cawnpore, p.39. 
important that we give it word for word below :- "Two or three months before Oudh was annexed, Shrimant Nana Sahib had begun sending letters. First, no one would reply, for no one hoped for any success. After Oudh was annexed, however, nana began a regular battery of letters and, then, the opinions of Nana began to appeal to the Sirkars of Lucknow. Raja Man Singh, the leader of the Purbhayas, was also won over. Then the Sepoys began to organise amongst themselves and the Sirkars of Lucknow began to help them. No replies to letters were received till Oudh was annexed; but as soon as that was accomplished, hundreds of people came forward boldly and replied confidentially to Nana. Next came the affair of the cartridges and, then, the disaffection was so great that letters were simply showered on Nana".33 This very agent has given a long list of the letters sent by Nana to the various Durbars. 
While agents of Nana were moving from one Durbar to another from Delhi to Mysore in order to draw them into the War of Independence, it was in the Dewan-I-Khas of Delhi, more than in any other Durbar, the seeds of Revolution began to take root. The English had not stopped at merely taking away the Padshahi of the Padshah of Delhi, but had recently decided even to take away the title of Padshah from the descendants of Babar. The Emperor, though reduced to such an extremity, and Zinat Mahal, the beloved, clever, and determined Begum of the Emperor, had already decided that this last opportunity of regaining the lost glory should not be allowed to go by, and, if dying was the only resource, then, they should die the death which would only befit an Emperor and an Empress. At this juncture, the 
33 For months for year indeed, the had been spreding there network of intrigues all over the country. Fron one native court to another, From one extremity to another of great continent of India, the agents of the Nana Saheb had passed with overtures and invitations discreetly, perhaps mystreously, worded to princes of chief of different races and religions, but most hopefully of all to the Mahratthas....There is nothing in my mind more substantiated than the complicity of Nana Sahib in widespread intrigues before the outbreak of the Mutiny. The concurrent testimony of witnesses examined in parts of the country widely distinct from each other takes this story altogether out of the regions of the conjectural.” Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, pp.24-25. 
English were engaged in a war with Persia. Seeing that a simultaneous rising in India would be a help, the Shah of Persia began to open diplomatic correspondence with the Emperor of Delhi. In the Declaration of the Emperor of Delhi, it had been made quite clear that a confidential agent had been sent to Persia from the Delhi Durbar. While this intrigue was going on at the Durbar of the Shah, right in the city of Delhi agitation was started to stir the public feeling to its very depths. For this work, even public Proclamations were sometimes posted up on the wells of the town. In the beginning of 1857, a Proclamation couched in the following terms appeared boldly : "The army of Persia is going to free India from the hands of the Feringhis. So, young and old, big and small, literate and illiterate, civil and military, all Hindusthanee brothers should leap forth into the field to free themselves from the Kaffirs.34 Though these Proclamations were ever and anon posted in public places, still the English could hardly trace the persons who posted these Proclamations; and Indian newspapers used to publish these Proclamations and to criticise them in mysterious language. The various Shahzadas and their retainers in the palaces of Delhi openly and secretly spread disaffection, and were engaged in weaving a net-work of conspiracies. In the grounds of Prince Nawab Bakht, for six years, Sergeant Fleming's son had been practising riding. But when, in the beginning of April 1857, this English youth went to the residence of Vizier Mahbub Ali, the prince, excited beyond measure, said, "Away, get away from here, I boil with rage when I see the face of any Feringhi!" So saying, the Prince spat on him!35 Other people were working more secretly and quite differently from 
34 Kaye's Indian Mutiny, Vol.II, p.30. 
35 Military Narrative (p.374): "Jawan Bakht commenced abusing, declaring that the 
sight of the Kaffir Feringhi disturbed his serenity, spat in his fact, and desired him to 
leave." 
the manner of this abusive prince. Mrs. Aldwell says in her evidence, that she had personally heard Mahomedan mothers asking their children to pray that the English should be destroyed root and branch.36 Mukund Lal, Private Secretary of the Emperor of Delhi, says :- "Sitting at the doors of the royal palace, used to discuss the Revolution openly. The Sepoys would rebel soon; the army of Delhi would rise against the English; and then, all people, along with the army, would throw off the Feringhi yoke and enjoy Swaraj - such definite opinions were current. All people were inspired with the hope that, when once the Raj was won, all power and all authority would remain in their own hands." Thus, the every cellar, in every house in Delhi, the disaffection only awaited for a spark which should explode everything up. 
Like the capital cities of Delhi and Brahmavarta, Lucknow also, the capital of Oudh, the last victim that had fallen a prey to the greed of Dalhousie, began to catch fire from the flames of the War of the Revolution. The Nabob of Lucknow and his Vizier were now residing near Calcutta. To all appearances, the Vizier of Lucknow looked as if he was wasting his time in luxury; as a matter of fact, however, Vizier Ali Nakkhi Khan was as much absorbed in his dangerous conspiracy near Calcutta as Nana Sahib himself was. One cannot help feeling wonderstruck at the schemes - secret, extensive, and daring - which Ali Nakkhi Khan was weaving to seduce the Sepoys in Bengal and to prepare them to join him at the right moment already fixed upon. Confidential agents were sent by him, in the garb of Fakirs or Sanyasis, to preach 'sedition' to the Sepoys. He opened correspondence with the Indian officers in the army to make them understand fully what immense advantages Swaraj could confer as compared with the service of the Company. How the English had committed an unpardonable crime in annexing Oudh, how the royal family of the Nabob had been treated with insult, and how the very Queen and Begums were expelled with violence from the palace - pictures of such heart-rending 
36 Trial of the King of Delhi. 
tyranny were drawn with such pathos that the brave Sepoys began to weep profusely. And, then and there, the Sepoys would take the water of the Ganges in their hands, or would swear by the Koran, that they would live only to achieve the destruction of the English rule. When Subahdar Majors, Subahdars, and Jamadars and the bigger officers were all sworn in, the whole regiment was naturally bound over. The Vizier of Oudh, by the use of such tactics, won over the whole army in Bengal.37 In Fort William itself, in Calcutta, the Revolutionary agents of Ali Nakkhi Khan moved silently. After sending letters to the various Durbars from Brahmavarta, Nana exerted himself thoroughly to awaken all the latent power of the people. Wshen Brahmavarta, Delhi, Lucknow, Satara, and such other big and prominent princes figures conspicuously in the Revolutionary Organisation, how could this organisation suffer for want of money ? To preach to all those who were a power among the people, thousands of Fakirs, Pundits, and Sanyasis were sent out in an incredibly short time. It is not true to say that all these Fakirs were true Fakirs; for, some of the Fakirs and Sadhus lived with the grandeur of Amirs. Elephants were given them for travelling. Guards armed to the teeth travelled with them, and every stage on their way was a regular camp. Provided with such paraphernalia, they could influence and impress the people better, and the Sirkar also had fewer reasons to suspect them. Influential and noble Moulvies were appointed to preach the political Jehad, and they were rewarded with thousands of Rupees. Through towns and villages, these Moulvies and Pundits, these Fakirs and these Sanyasis began 
37 Some of the letters of the Sepoys of Barrackpore fell into the hands of the Ednglish. Kaye adduces the following letters as evidence for the above. "The second grenadier said that the whole regiment is ready to join the Nabob of Oudh." "Subahdar Madarkhan, Sirdar Khan, and Ram Shahi Lal said, “that in treachery no one could come up to the level of the “Beti-choot” Feringhis. Though the Nabob of Oudh gave up his kingdom, he could not even get a pension.” Many other letters, like this, the English came across afterwards.—Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p. 429. (These regiments consisted of the sepoys from Oudh, Agra, and were only stationed in Bengal.--- Author’s note). 
to travel, from one end of the country to the other, preaching secretly the war for political independence. Just this start was wanted, for this same trick was begun independently by other groups of the Revolutionary Organisation. After these paid missionaries came volunteers. Begging from door to door, they began to sow, in all directions, the principles of independence, patriotism, and love of Dharma - for the awakening of strength among the people. This work of preparing for revolutionary rising was done so cautiously and secretly that not much inkling of what was going on could reach even such cunning people as the English, until the explosion actually took place. When such a Fakir or a Sanyasi went to a village, a strange agitation and an unrest began in that village, and of this the English were sometimes cognisant. Whisperings went on in bazaars; 'sahibs' were refused water by the Bhishtis,Ayahs left English homes without permission; Baberchis purposely stood before the Mem-Sahibs half-dressed; and Indian messanger boys walked insolently and slovenly before their "masters", when sent out.38 These Fakirs and Pundits used to walk round and about the military cantonments more particularly. From Barrackpore to Meerut, Umballa and Peshawar, they started secret societies and, more than that, practically surrounded every military cantonment. The Hindu and Moslem Sepoys in the army being very devoted to their religious teachers, the Sirkar, though they might suspect them, could hardly proceed against them. For, they feared that the Sepoys would find in it another grievance against the Government. And, if the Sirkar did, by any chance, suspect them, these political Sanyasis sowed the seeds of the Revolutionary War in the very houses of the Sepoys in the neighbouring village. The authorities at Meerut were at last compelled to ask a Fakir, who was lodging near the Meerut military cantonment, to move away. As soon as this order came, like a simple, innocent man, this grand person left the camp on his elephant, only to go to a neighbouring village and establish himself securely in the houses 
38 Trevelyan's Cawnpore. 
of the Sepoys!39 That patriot Moulvie Ahmad Shah, whose sacred name has cast a halo round Hindusthan, whose glorious achievements we shall have to describe very soon, began similarly to tour through the country preaching the Revolutionary War. At last, when he began to preach in Lucknow itself, to thousands and tens of thousands in open meetings, that the hearers the martial craving for war. This heroic material song, sung with spiritby minstrels, would cause the arms of the hearers tingle and itch for battle, and their blood would begin to boil on listening to the exploits of their ancestors; then, the subject would 
To instil into every heart the one great desire for indedpendence, and rouse it to action, there could be no more effective weapon than poetry. When the mass of the people are possessed by an idea which struggles for adequate expression, the poet, who realises the idea more intensely than the rest, gives it a beautiful expression, which at once touches their hearts and 
makes them love the idea still more. Hence the great part that national songs play in all revolutions. The national songs are an expression of the national sour under the sway of a strong ideal. They unite the hearts of the people with ease. When the soul of the land of Bharata was swayed by an intense passion for liberty, for the protection of Swadharma and the attainment of Swarajya, strange indeed would it have been if the heart of the nation did not burst into song. The principal court bard of the Emperor of Delhi had himself composed a national song which was to be sung by every throat in Hindusthan, and the Emperor of Delhi, in person, had ordered that this should be sung on all occasions of public ceremony. It described the heroic deeds of the past and painted a pathetic picture of the present fallen state. In that national song was echoed the cry of the nation that those persons, whose heads had been crowned but yesterday with imperially aggressive independence, should be reduced to the condition of slaves to- day, that their religion which yesterday was the state religion should to-day 
39 The Meerut Narrative be unprotected, and that heads crowned recently with glory should, alas, be trampled to-day under the foot of the foreigner.40 
While the national song was educating the people about their past glory and their present fall, a prophecy, that emblazoned the star of future hope and encouraged all, was heard, in the land. Prophecies are the leaps of the mind into the future. As soon as the heart of India began to long for Swaraj, the prophecies too began to point to Swaraj. From the northern snows to the extreme south, young and old circulated the prophecy that, thousands of years ago, a holy, ancient sage had foretold that the Feringhi Raj would end exactly a hundred years from the date of its creation! Indian newspapers gave wide publicity to this prophecy and interpreted it to mean that the Company’s Raj would fall to pieces on the 23rd of June,1857. This one prophecy led to the performance of such wonders in Hindusthan that it may safely be asserted that, but for this prophecy, several portions of this history would have to be written in a different way altogether. The year 1857 was the centenary of the Battle of Plassey and the 
Company's rule would end in that year - this idea created a strange hope and an extraordinary inspiration which moved every part of Hindusthan since the beginning of 1857. After a considerable heated discussion between various English historians as to who foretold this, it has at last been decided beyond doubt that it was the stratagem of the Hindus, since it was according to their almanacs that the 100th year of Plassey fell in the year 1857. By this national prophecy, the impression of which is indelibly indited on some of the most important pages of this history, an 
40A mandate had, of late, gone forth from the palace of Delhi enjoining the Mahomedans, at all their 
solemn gatherings, to recite a song of lamentation indited by the regal musician himself which 
described in touching strains the humiliation of their race and the degradation of their ancient faith, 
once triumphant from the northern snows to the southern straits but now trodden under the foot of 
the infidel and the alien.- Trevelayn's Cawnpore. 
extraordinary wave of agitation came over the hearts of the yound and old, and every one began to be ready to turn the prophecy into an actual fact. 
The secret organisation of the Revolution, which was first started in Brahmavarta was now growing at a tremendous rate.41 By this time, nuclei had been established in various places in Northern India and regular communication had been established between them. Rango Bapuji was trying hard to create nuclei of this organisation in the Deccan. The palace at Brahmavarta was the focus of the activities at Cawnpore; the same function was performed for Delhi by the Dewan-I-Khas of that premier city. The great and saintly Ahmad Shah had woven fine and cleverly the webs of Jehad - the War of Independence - through every corner of Lucknow and Agra. Kumar Singh, the hero of Jagadishpur, had taken the leadership of his province and, in consultation with Nana, had been busy gathering materials for war. The seeds of the Jehad had taken such root in Patna that the whole city was a regular haunt of the Revolutionary party. Moulvies, Pundits, 
41 Malleson says at the end of his voluminous history : "Of this conspiracy, the 
Moulvi was undoubtedly a leater. It had its ramifications all over India - certainly at 
Agra where the Moulvi stayed sometime- and almost certainly at Delhi, at Meerut, at 
Patna, and at Calcutta where the ex-King of Oudh and a large following were 
residing."-Vol.V, p.292. rise ye, one and all, to drive out the Feringhi Kaffirs! They have 
trampled under foot the very elements of justice, they have robbed us of Swaraj; 
determined are they to reduce to dust our country. There is only one remedy, now, to 
free India from the insufferable tyranny of the Kaffir Feringhis, and that remedy is to 
wage a bloody war. This is a Jehad for Independene! This is a religious war for justice! 
Those who fall in such battles will be their country's shahids. Opened wide are the doors 
of Heaven for the shahids. But Hell is burning fierce to engulf those wretches, whose 
cowardly traitors, who turn away from this national duty! Countrymen, of these, which 
would ye have? Choose now, even now!" 
Zemindars, farmers, merchants, vakils, students, of all castes and creeds, were ready to give up their lives for the sake of Swadesh and Swadharma. A very prominent leader of this secret organisation was a book-seller ! Near Calcutta, the Nabob of Oudh and his Vizier, Ali Nakkhi Khan, had seduced all the Sepoys and were ready for the occasion. The Mahomedan population of Hyderabad began to call secret meetings. The coils of the Revolution began to wind themselves round the Durbar of Kolhapur. The states of Patwardhan, and the father-in-law of Nana, at Sangli, were ready to fight - with their followers - under the banner of the united nation, in the coming war. Why, right of Madras, in the beginning of the year 1857, the following Proclamation began to appear from the walls of the city: "Countrymen and faithful adherents of your religion, rise, 
To link together the innumerable group of the various provinces which were workiong separately, men were employed to travel about secretly and letters were rarely used. If letters were used at all, they were written in a mysterious language, any mention of names being avoided. But when, after some time, the English persisted in opening any and every letter that appeared suspicious to them, the leaders, in order that their schemes should not come out and not even a trace should be known to others, began to carry on their correspondence in a kind of cipher; a sort of code was formed composed of dots and numbers, and this was used by them on all occasions!42 
While everywhere activity of this kind was going on, the blunder as to the cartridges, born of the criminal desire to spite the religious feelings of the Sepoys, was committed by the English. This filled the cup of their iniquity! Every soldier vied with every other to fire the first short. At the proper time, in the war to be waged for the object that was foremost in the minds of all their fellow-countrymen. We have already described how Nana and Ali Nakkhi Khan had acquired perfect control over the Sepoys of every 
42 Inne’s Sepoy Revolt, p.55. 
regiment, and how thousands of Fakirs were sent into the regiments to seduce the Sepoys to patriotism. But after the mean and cunning trick was played by the English in respect of the cartridges, every Sepoy began, on his own account, to urge every other Sepoy to take the oath of fighting for their common country. In these two months, thousands of letters were sent from Barrackpore, in the name of the Nabob of Oudh, to the regiments stationed in the Panjab, in Maharashtra, and at Meerut, Umballa and other places. When immense bags full of letters were carried in the post, the English had their suspicions roused, and they - especially Sir John Lawrence - began to open these letters. All this time an extraordinary self-confidence had been created in the Sepoys. 
The Englishmen asked the Sepoys wounded in the battle of Kali Nadi and ordered to be blown from cannon mouths how they dared to rise against them; and the Sepoys replied, “If Sepoys are united, the whites would be like a drop in the ocean.” A letter of one of these opened by the English says, “Brothers, we ourselves are thrusting the foreigners’ sword into our body. If we rise, success is assured. From Calcutta to Peshawar, there will be an uncontested maidan.” The Sepoys used to call together meetings secretly in the night. All resolutions were passed in the general meetings, and all decisions passed in the inner circles were obeyed strictly and by all. When they used to come to the secret societies, they used to conceal their identity by covering their faces completely, leaving only their eyes uncovered, and then speak about the thousand and one oppressions committed in the country by the English.43 If any one of the members was 
43 "These incendiary fires were soon followed by nocturnal meetings. Men met each 
other muffled faces and discussed in excited language the intolerable outrages the 
British Government had committed upon them." Kaye's Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p.365. 
"On the parade ground, about 1300 men were assembled. They had their heads covered 
so that only a small part of the face was exposed. They said they were determined to de 
for their religion." - Narrative of the Indian Mutiny, p.5 
suspected of telling the name of the conspirators to the enemy, he was immediately put to death. In order that common deliberation should take place between the various regiments, it was arranged that on festive occasions one regiment should invite another to a feast and, on this pretext, united gatherings were carried on successfully. Meetings of select Sepoys were held in the house of the Subahdars. Though all political and religious wrongs were explained and commented on to the lowest Sepoy in the army, though every Sepoy knew about, and was anxious for, a fight with the English, still the knowledge of how to rise, when to rise, and who were the leaders of the various groups was not imparted to all. The work of deciding all these things was left to the officers, and every one was made of Tulsi, or by the Koran, that each one would do what the regiment should undertake to do. When one regiment was thus bound together, the chief committee of that regiment began negotiations with the chief committee of another regiment; each swore faithfulness to the other and they worked together. The mutual oath of the regiments, like the mutual oaths of the Sepoys were determined and decisive. Every regiment was a unit in the higher organisation. The English afterwards gathered a good deal of material to determine what this organisation was, and Mr. Wilson gives the following information about the society, in the Government report : "From the available evidence I am quite convinced that the 31st of May, 1857, had been decided on as the date for simultaneous rising. Every regiment had a committee of three members; and this committee used to do everything connected with the Mutiny. The Sepoys had no idea what decisions were arrived at. Tye mutual agreements between the various regiments simply amounted to agreeing to do what the other regiments would do. The committee had to decide on all important schemes, to do all the correspondence, and several other things. All came to the one important decision that the Sepoys should rise on the 31st. As it was a Sunday, they would be able to find a large number of European officers in 
church. All European officers, along with these, were to e murdered. Then all the treasuries, that would be full with the proceeds of the Rabbi crops, were to be looted. Jails were to be broken open and prisoners released. For in the NorthWestern provinces, from the prisoners alone an army of nearly 25,000 people could be formed." As soon as the rising rook place, the power-magazines and armouries were to be taken possession of. All forts and strategic positions were to be taken, wherever possible. Such was the secret structure of the Revolutionary Organisation, and it had bound together the whole army. 
To supply the sinews of war to the secret organisation, the Sahukars of Lucknow, the palaces of Nana and Vizier Ali Nakkhi Khan, the Mahal of Delhi, and other heads of the Revolutionary party were sufficient. While the Sepoys were concerting their secret schemes, some secrets, now by a trifling mistake, now through a traitor, leaked out. Then, the English Government issued orders that the whole regiment about which the suspicion of disaffection arose should be at once dismissed. That, was most excellent. Why ? The Government thus actually gave to the country so many volunteer Sanyasis to spread the fire of Revolution all round. The various Durbars of Hindusthan, the ordinary people, and the military - these three divisions of the people were linked together by the indefatigable efforts of the able Revolutionary leaders. There still remains the class of civil officers. An outline of the particular part which this class played in the structure of the Revolution must be given. The coming pages will clearly show that most of the more prominent Indian civilians in Northern India had taken a leading part in the "mutiny". From the Patel and Kulkarni of the village to the native judge of the high court, Hindu and Mussalman officers of all ranks, pleaders and clerks, had joined the Revolutionary Organisation secretly. The fact that the Government had not the least idea of the extensive organisation is easily explained; for these native officers alone are the eyes with which the Government was to see anything. But, on the other hand, it had been decided that, until the critical moment, these Government officers should not show 
even the least opposition to the Sirkar. Not only that, but very often it happened that, when it was necessary to arrest a Revolutionary leader, these Indian officers, who were the accomplices of this man, used to treat him as cruelly as an English officer would do, and used to sentence him to heavy punishment. When the Meerut Sepoys were tried, it was the native judges that passed heavy sentences on them; but it came to light that these very judges were scheming for a Revolution. Anonymous proclamations were posted at every square of the city of Lucknow, written invery strong language, to agitate the masses. These proclamations were couched in fiery and violent language. We give the following as a specimen. "Hindus and Mahomedans, rise unitedly and decide, once for all, the fate of the country; for, if this opportunity is allowed to slip by, not a single way will be left open to the people even to preserve their lives. This is the last chance. Now or never!" Though the English authorities knew well that proclamations were issued every day, they could to no more than tear them off; and still, every time they were destroyed, new ones were put up. The police used to declare that it was impossible for them to find out as to who put up these posters and when they were put up. The English came to know the reason soon after. The police themselves were the prominent members of the Revolutionary party.44 
Not alone in the revolution of Russia, but in the Revolution in India, too, the police were found to be in sympathy with the people. The programme, then, of the civil officers was to join secretly in the Revolutionary organisation of their countrymen without giving up government service and, when the right time came, to work on under Swarajya, performing those very functions which they were all doing under the English government. 
Now that the wheels of the secret machinery of the Revolution were set in motion, it was necessary to arrange that all the various motions should be synchronised. With this purpose in Bengal, a messenger of the 
44 Red Pamphlet: Part II. 
Revolutionaries went to the cantonments, taking a red lotus in his hand. He would give the red lotus into the hands of the chief Indian officer in the first regiment. The chief would pass it to the one next to him, and so the red lotus would pass from Sepoy to Sepoy through the hands of all the thousand Sepoys, and then the last Sepoy would return it back to the Revolutionary messenger. That was enough ! Without a whisper or a word, the messenger would pass on like an arrow and, as soon as the next regiment was in sight, he would give the red lotus in the hands of its chief officer. In this way, the organisation, so full of poetry, became impressed with one opinion, with revolution, with blood. The red lotus was the final seal of the organisation. What a tumult of thoughts must be raging in the mind of every Sepoy when he touched the red flower! That courage which it would have been impossible for the eloquence of orators to inspire was imparted in those warlike fellows by the dumb lotus flower and by the mute eloquence of its red, red colour.45 
A lotus flower! The symbol, the poet-appointed symbol, of purity, victory, light! And its colour red, vivid red! The very touch of the lotus flower makes every heart bloom. When the Sepoys, hundreds upon hundreds, were passing on rapidly from hand to hand this lotus flower, the eloquence of it must have been full of wild suggestions and wilder aspirations. “The red lotus really made all the people one; for, in Bengal, both the Sepoys and agriculturists were found giving expression to this one sentiment, ‘All is going to be red!’, with a movement of the eyes which 
45 "A man apeared with a lotus flower and handed it to the chief of the regiment. He 
handed it on to another-every man took it and passed it on and, when it came to the last, 
he suddenly disappeared to the next station. There was not, it appears, a detachment, 
not a station in Bengal, through which the lotus flower was not circulated. The 
circulation of this simple symbol of conspiracy was just after the annexation of Oudh." - 
Narrative of the Mutiny: p.4. (The book also gives the picture of the flower.) 
betrayed an extraordinary, mysterious pregnancy of meaning”.46 ‘All will be red’- with what? 
This red lotus and this suggestive sentiment had made all “one- voiced” as far as individuals were concerned. But, it was also necessary to make all the principal nuclei one-voices through mutual visits. So Nana came out from the palace of Brahmavarta to link together into one chain the various links – nuclei of the organisation. With him started his brother, Bala Sahib, and his amiable and witty councillor, Azimullah. And why did they start? “For a pilgrimage!” Indeed! A Brahmin and a Moslem are starting together, arm in arm, to visit the holy, religious places, - an event without a precedent! 
This was in the March of 1857. Most essential was it now, indeed, to visit at least once the places of pilgrimage - and the first that they visited was Delhi. Only the Dewan-I-Khas or, perhaps, the atmosphere of Delhi could speak about the accents with which the consultations were carried on! At this very time, a judge of Agra, one Mr.Morel, came to see Nana. The later gave him such a hearty welcome that he did not have the least suspicion about the diffrerent kind of welcome which Nana was busy preparing for the English and which he was going to offer within a month or two. After supervising all arrangements at Delhi, Nana went to Umballa. On the 18th of April, he reached Lucknow, the important centre among the various nuclei. On that very day the people of Lucknow had followed the buggy of Sir Henry Lawrence, Chief Commissioner Sahib, and pelted him with a shower of mud and stones. And now Shrimant Nana had come there! This infused the whole city of Lucknow with an almost uncontrollable joy and excitement. Nana started in a huge procession through the chief streets of Lucknow, and a strong confidence was instilled in the Revolutionary party on seeing their would-be commander. Nana voluntarily went to Sir Henry Lawrence and told him that he had come to see Lucknow out of simple curiosity. Sir Henry issued orders to all the officers to show due 
46 Trevelyan's Cawnpore. 
respect to Nana. Poor Sir Lawrence! He did not know what this simple curiosity meant. After visiting Lucknow, Nana went to Kalpi. The diplomacy of Nana was actgively going on, this time with Kumar Singh of Jagadishpur who was in intimate correspondence with him about this time.47 
Thus after personally visiting the leaders of the principal nuclei at Delhi, Umballa, Lucknow, Kalpi, etc., and drawing up a clear programme and a definitely outlined map of the future campaign, Nana returned to Brahmavarta about the end of April.48 
While, by visiting the principal leaders, Shrimant Nana was touring to determine the date and bring about the necessary unity of purpose, a strange band of secret messengers to Revolution were going about at express speed throughout the length and breadth of India, to prepare the people for the great day. These messengers were not a new thing at all. Whenever the work of Revolution was started, these agents - Chapatees - have as a rule done the work of carrying the errand far and wide in the land. For, in the Mutiny of Vellore, too, Chapatees were used to perform the same function. These angels with unseen wings were flying through every secret corner of the country, setting the mind of the whole country on fire by the very vagueness of the message. Whence they came and whither they 
47 Red Pamphlet. 48 Nana must have gone during this tour to many other cities, but, as English 
historians have not expressly mentioned them, they cannot be given. The following 
quotation is rather important: "Afterwards, the worthy couple (Nana and Azim), on the 
pretence of a pilgrimage to the hills, visited the military stations all along the main 
trunk road and went so far as Umballa. It has been suggested that their object is going 
to Simla was to tamper with the Gurkha regiments stationed on the hills. But finding, 
on their arrival at Umballa, a portion olf the regiment were in cantonments, they were 
unable to effect their purpose with these men and desisted from their proposed journey, 
on the plea of the cold weather." -Russel's Diary. went, no one could say. To those alone who were expecting them these strange symbols carried the exact message and spoke with limited significance; as for those whom they took unawares, illimitable was the conversation that they carried on! Some silly Government officers tried to get hold of these Chapatees, cut them to small crumbs, powered them, and powered once more, and tried if they could give some message; but, like witches the Chapatees had to tongue when they were asked to speak. The Chapatee spoke only to those it meant to speak to. It was made from wheat or millet flour. Nothing was written on it; yet it inspired the men who knew it with a strange Revolutionary energy at its very touch. The Choukidar of every village had it. He ate a bit of it first himself and gave the rest, as Prasad, to those who asked. The same number of Chapatees were made afresh and sent to the inhabitants of the neighbouring villages. The Choukidar of the latter place would send it to yet another village and, so, this fiery red cross of India travelled from village to village, kindling with flames every village it touched. Speed on, Angel of Revolution, speed on! Go thou forth to preach the Gospel to all the dear children of India, that the country is ready for a holy war to make everyone of them free. Dash on, Messenger, to all the ten directions, not stopping even at midnight, piercing the air with the age-inspiring cry, "The Mother goes forth to the war! March on! March on!! Save her!!!" The gates of the cities are closed; still wait not thou till they open - but fly over through the air. The mountain-defiles are deep; broken are the steep ascents; the rivers are wide, the forests are dangerous; still dread thou not, but speed like an arrow with this terrible national message. On thy speed depends the life or the death of the Desh and the Dharma. Hence cover as many miles as thou possibly canst and race with the wind! When the enemies destroy one shape of thee, go, thou miraculous Angel, assuming hundreds of forms at this critical period of our national existence! In every shape and form of thy speed create for thyself a thousand tongues. Invite all-wife and husband, mother and child, sister and brother- to come with their relatives to accomplish the predestined task! Invite the 
spears of the Mahrattas, the swords of the Rajputs, the Kirpan of the Sikhs, the Crescent of the Islamites - invite one and all to make the ceremony a success. Call the Goddesses of War at Cawnpore! Call the Goddesses of the forts in Jhansi! Call the Goddesses of Jagadishpur. To bless the work of national Revolution, bring with thee all thy relations, drums and trumpets, flags and banners, clarionets and war-songs, thunderings and war-cries. The martial spirit of the nation is awaiting the signal. Tell them all, "The auspicious hour is soon to strike; so, be ready!" 
Ready! Friends, be ready! And, O unfortunate Tyranny sleeping unconsciously and proud on the green, green hills, be thou ready too! The world might believe that a hill appearing green from a distance is really green. Nor does it fully know yet what a mistake it is to trample under foot the crown of such a hill. Trample, aye, trample! Now shines forth the year 1857, and in a moment it will be clear that the description of Kalidas applies literally to India. "In those whose wealth is their penance and patience, forget not there is a concealed fire, which, if it bursts forth, can consume the whole world!" O world! Our India has certainly patience as its prominent feature; but do not, on that account, take undue advantage of it for within her heart, whose treasure is all-forbearing calmness, resides concealed, the terrible fire for vengeance too. Hast thou ever beheld the third eye of Shankar? That is calmness itself while it is closed; but from it can issue the flames which can reduce the whole universe to ashes! Hast thou ever beheld a volcano! Apparently it is clothed with soft green vegetation; but let it once open its jaws, and then all sides will begin to pour forth boiling lava. Like unto that this living volcano of Hindusthan, fierce as the third eye of Shankar, has begun to boil. Terrible streams of lava in its interior are bubbling up tumultuously. Dangerous mixtures of explosive chemicals are being formed, and the spark of the love of liberty has fallen on it. Let Tyranny take heed when it is not yet too late! Neglect it in the least, and a 
thunderous explosion would teach insolent Tyranny what a volcanic vengeance really means! 
END OF PART I