 INDIAN WAR OF 
INDEPENDENCE 1857 
PART-III The Conflagration 
© Himani Savarkar, 
Savarkar Bhavan, Raja Thakur Path, Shanivar Peth, Pune. 
tel :+912025544751 
Internet Rights are with Swatantryaveer Savarkar Rashtriya Smarak Trust, Dadar, Mumbai 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
PART-III 
The Conflagration 
CHAPTER-I 
THE FIGHT IN DELHI 
AFTER declaring her Independence on the 11th of May, the city of Delhi had been busy in organising the wild storm, that such a bold step has raised into a systematised revolution. By restoring the Emperor of Delhi to the ancient throne of the Moguls, the citizens of Delhi had already created a nucleus mighty enough, by the very prestige of its name, to sustain the struggle of a people's liberation. But this restoration of the old Mogul was a restoration, neither to the old power nor to the old prestige, nor to the old traditions. Though the raising of the old Bahadur Shah to the Emperirship of Hindusthan was, in a narrower sense, a restoration to him of his ancient throne, still in a wider and truer sense, it was no restoration at all. For, the Mogul dynasty of old was not chosen by the people of the land. It was thrust upon India by sheer force, difnified by the name of conquest, and upheld by a powerful pack of alien adventures and native selfseekers. It was not this throne that was restored to Bahadur Shah today. No, that would have been impossible; for, such thrones are conquered and not received. That would have been suicidal; for, then, it would have been in vain that the blood of hundreds of Hindu martyrs had been shed in the three or four centuries preceding. Ever since the rising power of Islam left its native wilds of Arabisthan and went conquering East and West, irresistible and unchallenged, country after country and people after people had been made to prostrate in submission of Islam. But the unopposed wave was opposed, for the first time in the land of Bharat, with such strenuous, uncompromising, and undaunted tenacity as could be found only very rarely 
in other histories. For more than five centuries the struggle continued; for more than five centuries the Hindu civilisation had been fighting a defensive war against the foreign encroachment on its birth-rights. From the death of Prithvi Raj right up to the death of Aurangzeb, the war was without a truce. And in the midst of this gory struggle of countless years, a Hindu power arose in the western mountains of Bharat Varsha which was destined to fulfil the mission of the innumerable dead, who fell fighting in protecting the honour of the race. From out of Poona, a Hindu prince Bhausahib - advanced with a mighty host, captured the throne of Delhi, and vindicated the honour of the Hindu civilisation; the conqueror was conquered and India was again free, the blot of slavery and defeat being wiped off. Hindus again were masters of the land of trhe Hindus. 
So, in the truer sense, we said that the raising of Bahadur Shah to the throne of India was no restoration at all. But rather it was the declaration that the longstanding was between the Hindu and the Mahomedan had endedd, that tyranny had ceased, and that the people of the soil were once more free to choose their own monarch. For, Bahadur Shah was raised by the free voice of the people, both Hindus and Mahomedans, civil and military, to be their Emperor and the head of the War of Independence. Therefore, on the 11th of May, this old venerable Bahadur Shah was not the old Mogul succeeding to the throne of Akbar or Aurangzeb - for that throne had already been smashed to pieces by the hammer of the Mahrattas - but he was freely chosen monarch of a people battling for freedom against a foreign intruder. Let, then, Hindus and Mahomedans send forth their hearty, conscientious, and most loyal homage to this elected or freely accepted Emperor of their native soil on the 11th of May, 1857! 
And from far and near, the loyal homage did come to the Delhi monarch, from many Rajas, many regiments, and many of the chief cities of Hindusthan. The different regiments that had risen at different placed in the Panjab, Ayodhya, Neemuch, Rohilkhand, and many other places, marched on to Delhi with their flags and banners, and tendered their services to the 
venerable Bahadur Shah as the accepted head of the Revolution. Many regiments again brought whatever treasuries they had looted from the possession of the English Government on their way to Delhi and faithfully handed them over to the treasury of the Emperor. A proclamation was at once issued, addressed to the whole of Hindusthan, declaring that the foreign domination and the rule of the Feringhis had come to and end and that the whole nation was free and liberated. It exhorted the people to rise to a man to complete this Revolution so promising in its beginning, and warned them that the sole motive that should dominate them in this fight should be a self-denying, spiritual fervour and a consciousness of a divine duty. "Let it be known that the only inducement we can hold forth is that of Dharma alone. Let all those to whom god has granted determination and will, renounce the hope of property and of life and join us in this cause of our ancient faith. If the people sacrifice their private interest for the public good, the Englishmen will be exterminated from our land. It should be known that no one dies before his time and, when his time comes, nothing can save him. Thousands of men are carried off by cholera and other diseases; while, to be killed in a war of Dharma is martyrdom. And it is the duty of every man and woman to kill or expel every Feringhi from the land of Hindusthan. Let zeal for religious duty alone be the motive of those who join me, and not any worldly aspiration, though they who rise for the faith get happiness in this world too!" 
These extracts are from the different, and sometimes similar, Proclamations published in Oudh and Delhi. Another Proclamation was issued from the throne itself and was most widely published all over India. Even in the farthest south were found copies passing from hand to hand, in the bazaars and in the army. It insisted : "To all Hindus and Mahomedans! We, solely on account of religious duty, have joined with the people. Whoever shall, in these times, exhibit cowardice or credulously believe the promiseds of the English impostors, will be very shortly put to shame and receive the reward for their fidelity to England which the rulers of Lucknow 
got. It is further necessary that all, Hindus and Mahomedans, unite in this struggle and, following the instructions of some respectable leaders, conduct themselves in such a way that good order may be maintained, the poorer classes kept contented, and they themselves be exalted to rank and dignity. Let all, as far as it is possible, copy this Proclamation and fix it in some prominent place, escaping detection if prudence requires it, and strike a blow with the sword before giving circulation to it!" 
Soon after the general declaration of war against the English power, the Revolutionaries at Delhi began to manufacture the arms and ammunition necessary for its continuation. A big factory of cannon, guns, and small arms was started, and some Frenchmen were employed to supervise the manufacture. Two or threebig ammunition depots were also opened and many maunds of gun-powder begs to be prepared by people working day and night. A general order was issued prohibiting the slaughter of kine throughout the country and, when once some fanatic Mahomedans wanted to insult the Hindus by declaring Jehad against them, the old Emperor, seated on an elephant and with all his Imperial officers, went in a procession through all the city declaring that the Jehad was against the Feringhis alone! Anyone found killing a cow was to be blown up or his hand cut off. Different regiments were named after the different princes of the palace. Some Europeans, too, were to be seen fighting on the side of the Revolutionaries against the English power. 
The position which the English had occupied after the battle of Bundel-ki-Serai was very nicely suited to their military operations. The long range of hills, styles by the English as the Ridge, which almost touched the fortifications of Delhi at one of its extremeties and extended to the river Jumna four miles ahead, had, owing to its height, a special advantage from the military point of view. For the Ridge, being higher than the surrounding level by fifty or sixty feet, offered a fine position for the guns so as to keep up a continuous and effective cannonade. Again, this Ridge had at its back the wide canal of the Jumna which, owing to the heavy rains of the year, 
was copiously supplied with water even in this month of June. Being at their back, this canal was free from attacks of the enemies of the English power, and now especially so; for, the Panjab, which would have been the greatest terror to the English had it attacked them from their rear as Delhi had been doing from their front, had now declared in favour of the British. The Rajas of Nabha, Jhind, and Patiala rendered an immense service to the English people by guarding all the highways to the Panjab and, thus, facilitating the transport of corn, men, and ammunition from the Panjab into the English camp. This combination of circumstances, unfortunate for India, rendered the situation extremely favourable to the English. High and lowering hills, behind them a plain for the whole army to encamp beyond the range of the enemy's fire and, at the same time, escape the detection of the enemy's scouts, water living and inexhaustible so closely running, the great highways to the Panjab all open, at hand, and protected, and the back guarded by the constant watch of the loyal Panjab states at their own cost - all these circumstances heightened the confidence of the British commander, Barnard, who along with his officers was of the opinion "Now, to take Delhi is not the work of even a day!" 
And if it is not even one day's work to take Delhi, then, why spend two for it? Why should we not reduce this sinful, treason-loving city to dust by ordering these English soldiers to pounce upon it just this very minute? The Panjab is the backbone of our army and when that is so strong in loyalty, why should we try to take Delhi by these weak tactics of prolonged siege? Would it not be better and nobler to rush straightway against that wretched city and crush it at the very first onslaught? Let our army be divided; let one of these divisions blow up this Lahore gate, let another pull down that Kabul gate, let many others rush simultaneously into streets of the city with a torrent-like rush and, taking post by post, let us all march on straight against the palace without the loss of a moment! Wilberforce Greathed and Hodson - warriors like these are longing for this bold and straight onrush, and have taken upon themselves even the entire 
responsibility of carrying it out to a successful termination. Then, there need be no hesitation at all. So on the 12th of June, General Barnard issued secret orders for the assault. It was all settled who should gather, where the gathering should take place, and when and how the different divisions should start under the cover of night, who should command the right and who the left. All these and many other details of the attack were settled and fixed and, now at two o'clock in the morning, the English army began to debouch itself on the parade ground which was fixed as the secret rendezvous. When it is certain that to-morrow's night will give us the chance of sleeping in the royal palace itself, who is so foolish as to grudge, to-night, a few hours' loss of sleep? Unlikely, indeed, but unfortunately true! For it happened that, at the proper hour, some parts of the army were found missing. Brigadier Graves thinks it rashness to begin the assault on Delhi in this fashion and it is even suggested by many others that such a scheme would be fatal to the British power itself all over India. Therefore, the dreams of the quick success and straight attacks, indulged in by the British army, had to be realised that night not in the palace of Delhi but on the camp-beds alone. 
The next morning, Willberforce Greathead again drew up a scheme for the future attack and sent it to the commander, Barnard, for reconsideration of the same. General Barnard, though a famous warrior known much in the Crimean campaigns, yet had been suspected of a very halting and hesitating mind. He called a council of war, on the 14th of June, to consult his chief officers on the subject of the assault. Even after the bold and eloquent advocacy by Greathead of a straight assault, the other officers could not feel confident of its success, and they urged further that even assuming that the assault would result in success, still, it would be much waste of energy and prestige as an actual defeat. The straight assault might carry Delhi - yet, how to hold it? How many English soldiers were likely to survive the constant cannonade of the Revolutionaries from street to street and from house to house? Barnard himself was most diffident of the issues. 
After all this discussion, the war council agreed - simply to disagree! And thus, even like the night-dream of the 12th of June, passed away this day- dream of the 15th of June, leaving "the straight assault" and "the bold rush" still in their theoretical existence and excellence. This council of war again sat, on the 16th of June; but that ended in a worse division of opinion and diffidence of mind. For, as the English commander was planning thebold and straight assault on the city of Delhi, there, on the other side, into the city of Delhi were pouring fast new hearts, new treasuries, and new energy. And the Revolutionaries, leaving the defensive policy which they had up to this time observed, began to assume the offensive as well, made frequent sorties, and attacked the British army from different sides and with varying success. 
The regiments that had risen all over India had been, all the while, pouring into Delhi with their treasuries, arms, and ammunition and left no anxiety in the Revolutionary camp as to the provisions of war or to the number of Sepoys. And so, it was quite natural that the Revolutionary army should assume the aggressive and pin the English army to its place by not allowing it to move onwards even by a single step. After making a bold attack, after a slight or even a bloody skirmish or encounter , without themseves suffering any heavy losses, the Indian army would retire into the city. By this harassing policy, the Revolutionary army kept the English in constant check and prevented them from assuming the offensive. On the 12th of June, they issued out of the city and, concealing themselves in threes and low grounds, advanced as far as within fifty yards of the English front and attacked them before they were aware of their presence. The English lost many artillerymen and Knox himself was killed by a Sepoy who deliberately aimed at and shot him. Simultaneously with this, another division of the Sepoys attacked the English rear, and there a hot encounter took place. Even on the right of the English army, the post called "Hindu Rao's house" was most vigorously attacked by the Sepoys. "A detachment of native irregular cavalry, on whose loyalty the English had relied, went over to the enemy. 
And so sudden was the retrograde movement that the greater number of them escaped from the first of our guns which were turned upon them as soon as their treachery was disclosed."1 Major Reid who was in charge of this place says: "They went to the front just as if they were going to charge; but no sooner had they closed than, to my horror, I saw them mix up with the enemy and walk off with them. Immeidately I saw this, I ordered the guns to open upon them but the wretches were too far off and I don's think that more than half-a-dozen were killed." 
After this assault, every day saw the Revolutionaries issuing from out the city and every evening saw them retiring back into the city. Any regiment that newly came into the city had to go out and attack the enemy the very next day. On the 13th of June, Hindu Rao's house was again attacked; the 60 regiment (the same that joined the Revolutionaries on the 12th) was conspicuous in the day's action. Major Reid writes that they "marched up the Grand Trunk Road in columns of sections right in front and led the attack headed by the Sirdar Bahadur of the regiment, who made himself very conspicuous, calling out to the men to keep their distance as he intended to wheel to his left. They fought most desperately. The Sirdar Bahadur was killed by his orderly, Lall Singh. I took the riband of India from his breast and sent it to my wife." On the 17th of June, the Indian army tried to erect a battery on the Idga building, which would have completely enfiladed the Ridge. Seeing this, Major Reid and Henry Tombs attacked the Revolutionaries from both sides and pressed upon them with irresistible force. But the handful of brave Revolutionaries who had been entrapped in this 
1 Kaye's Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 411. building did not surrender at all. When they could 
no longer discharge volleys of shots, they threw away their guns, drew out their swords, and fell 
fiercely on the British foe. They did not allow the enemy to occupy the Idga building, until 
every one of them was killed and fell fighting at his post! 
On the 18th of June, the Sepoys who had rebelled at Nasirabad came to Delhi, and delivered over the treasure that they had brought with them to the royal authorites; and their representatives were redeived by the Emperor himself in the palace; and they were treated with due honour and respect. At the Durbar, the representatives of the Sepoys of this regiment took oath to attack the English army on the 20th of June. Accordingly, the morning of the 20th of June saw the hosts of Revolutionaries leaving the gates of the city and marching towards the foreign foe. In order to attack the English forces on their rear, the Sepoys stole forth through Sabzi Mundi and, taking the English by surprise, they opened fire with terrible effect and advanced against the English. Scott, Money, Tombs, and other English officers tried their utmost by heavy cannonading to stop the onslaught, but the tenacity with which the Indian army pushed on was irresistible. The brigade from Nasirabad pushed on with such destructive force that the brave Tombs cried out, through supreme despondency, “Run on, 
Daly, run on! Or my cannon are lost to the enemies!" Daly did come on with the Indians of the Panjab but, in a short time, was sent back by the Revolutionaries with a bullet lodged in his shoulder. As the evening approached, the Revolutionaries decidedly got the upper hand. Again, they pressed on, nay, almost captured the British guns. The 9th lancers and the loyal Panjabees, though they more than once came rushing against them, had to retire precipitately. The night set in, but the field was still hotly contested. The English did their best but could do nothing further than to save their cannon. Lord Roberts writes : "The mutineers routed us." Hope Grant had a horse killed under him, himself was terribly wounded, and, but for the loyaltyof a Mahomedan horseman standing near by, would have been killed in a minute. Such fighting continued till the middle of the night, but still the advance of the Sepoys could not be checked, and so, at last, the English retired from the battlefield and left the Revolutionaries in complete and victorious possession of an important position at the rear of the British camp! That night the British commander could not sleep for anxiety. For, had the Revolutionaries retained the possession they had so bravely won, they would have completely cut off the British communications with the Panjab. To avoid this evil, the British, early in the morning, were preparing to offer a further resistance to the victorious Swadeshi army. But owing to the want of ammunition and further additions to their numbers, the Sepoys retired into the city, leaving the English to take possession of the ground they had vacated. The news of this battle and the dogged march of the Sepoys had encouraged the Delhi people and, the canon on the wall being of long range, they kept up a constant and unceasing fire on the British army. These onslaughts of the Delhi army effectively prevented the British army from assuming the offensive, by constantly compelling them to be themselves on the defensive. And the difficulty which the English found even in maintaining the ground they had occupied made it impossible for them to advance even a step further without receiving new succour from the Panjab. And, to add to all these difficulties rose to-day - the 23rd of June, 1857! 
This 23rd of June of 1857 is the centenary of the battle of Plassey! It was on this day that, a hundred years ago, in the gamble for empires the Indian dice proved unlucky on the battlefield of Plassey. One hundred years have passed, each adding new insults and new shame to those previously inflicted! To settle this standing account of a century of degradation, to wash off these national insults and this national shame by torrents of blood - this is the fierce desire that gleams in the eyes of all the Sepoys in the city of Delhi. Through every breeze of the wind and through every ray of the sun, through every thundering roar of the cannon and through every clashing of the sword, comes forth a deep rumbling voice, "Plassey! The Vengeance of Plassey!" As soon as the dawn announced the hundredth anniversary of the woeful field of Plassey, the Revolutionary forces began to pour out of the Lahore gates of the city. The English people, too well aware of the fact that this day would tax their energies to the 
utmost, were quite prepared and had already drawn up their soldiers in battle-array even before the day rose. Nay, through this very anxiety, they requested the Government of the Panjab to send them help, which fortunately for them, did arrive on the eve of this day. This news of the arrival of fresh troops from the Panjab infused the English with great confidence. But, neither this news of the reinforcements which the English received nor the discovery of the fact that the British had already destroyed the bridges leading to their rear would stop the enthusiasm of the Revolutionaries. They rushed on through the Sabzi Mundi and began to open fire on the British. The British infantry led charge after charge, but the Revolutionists repulsed them as often as they sallied forth. The artillery from the walls of the city was doing its work with equal vigour. Hindu Rao's house, too, was receiving its share of attention from the Revolutionaries. At twelve in the noon, the battle was raging hottest. The Revolutionaries led attacks after attacks on the Panjabee division, the Gurkha battalion, and the white troops of the British. Major Reid says: "The mutineers, about twelve o'clock, made a most desperate attack on the whole of my position. No man could have fought better. They charged the rifles, the guides, and my own men again and again and, at one time, I thought I must have lost the day."2 
That one of the bravest English officers, fighting on the very spot, should write these words testifies to the fierceness and strength of the attacks of the Revolutionaries. Yet, they had no capable leader who could bring into a focus these scattered elements of fire and energy. The ardent desire to win back the liberty of the land and the remembrance of the national insult of Plassey were the only ties that could keep them coherent. Even the English artillery was in a great danger of being captured by the Indian army and, at last, the chief officer, Colonel Welshman, himself was shot dead while goading on his men! The whole day, every man in the English camp was fighting hard and now it seemed that they could no longer 
2 Major Reid's Siege of Delhi. 
hold on. But still the British commander need not lose hope! For the fresh troops of the loyal Panjabees that had come this very morning are eager to try their chance! They were ordered to march on and, against this fresh attack of fresh soldiers, the Revolutionaries, who had unceasingly been fighting the whole day, had to enter into an unequal contest. However, till the night set in, the Revolutionaries fought on, greatly handicapped as they were. And then, the armies retired from the field, each party claiming the honour of a victory! So ended the centenary of Plassey in the defeat of neither, and both the armies entered their respective camps, filled with respect for each other's courage and bravery. 
Day after day, new troops were coming in on both sides. The English forces, after frequent reinforcements from the Panjab had by this time, risen to the number of seven thousand. On the other side, the regiments of Rohilkhand who had risen in revolt had reached Delhi, with Bakht Khan at their head. Lord Robert says : "The Rohilkhand army, having crossed the bridge of boats, began to enter the city through the Calcutta gate. We could clearly tee these thousands of Sepoys from the Ridge, entering the city with perfect discipline and drill playing martial tunes, and waving variegated flags and banners." The only force that was able to unite to some extent these different regiments in Delhi was that of love of the principle alone. For, there could grow no organised and compact army from amongst these thousands of Sepoys of different castes and creeds who had never seen the faces of each other in their whole life and had been drifted together by a chance storm. In spite of the utmost efforts of the Emperor and 
his councillors to stop looting and anarchy in the city, no day would pass without some complaint or other of the Sepoy lawlessness, or of looting, or of blackmail. In this state, the supreme need of the hour was a leader who could unite these innumerable and divergent forces into a unifying focus. The city of Delhi, in spite of the growth of the evil tendencies and vicious propensities in the men, so natural in an agitated time as this, had led attack after attack on the English army and had, at 
least, held them in fear and check. It was the ardent desire amongst the soldiery and the citizens to drive away the foreign foe, that enabled them to do this. But to ensure ultimate success, it was imperatively necessary that this love of the abstract principle must be united with, and concentrated in, the ability of a great personality. It was, therefore, thought to be a Godsent when the brave Bakht Khan of Rohilkhand entered Delhi with his troops and treasury. The state of the public mind at Delhi, at the time of the arrival of Bakht Khan, is well descrfibed in the diary of one who was then living in Delhi. This extract, though meagre and casual, is taken here not only to give some account of this particular day but to give a general idea of the stateof Delhi and the course which events were taking. “The bridge of the Jumna is repaired; for, the arrival of the Rohilkhand troops is expected. The Emperor with a telescope viewed the approaching army of Rohilkhand while it was still far away. On the morning of the 2nd of July, Nabob Ahmad Kuli Khan, with all other nobles and citizens, went forth to receive the army of Rohilkhand. Hakeem Ahsanullah Khan, General Sanad Khan, Ibrahim Ali Khan, Gulam Kuli Khan, and other leavers, too, were present. Mahomed Bakht Khan, the commander of the forces of Rohilkhand, requested the Emperor to accept his services. When Bakht Khan pressed his request to know the desire of the Emperor, the Emperor said : 'It is my ardent desire to see that the people are completely protected, that the security of life and property is maintained, and that the extermination of the British foe is triumphantly carried out.' The general then said that, if the Emperor wished, he was ready to act as the commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary forces. At this, the Emperor pressed the hand of the general with affection. Then, the different heads of the different regiments were called together and they were asked whether they would elect Bakht Khan as commander-in-chief. All of them voted 'aye' and took military oaths of obeying the general as their commander-in-chief. After the levee was over, the Emperor again granted a private interview to the general. All over the city, the order went forth that Bakht Khan would act as the commander-in-chief. He was presented with a shield, a sword, and the title of General. The Prince Mirza 
Mogul was appointed adjutant-general. Bakht Khan informed the Emperor that, even if any of the princes of royal blood would continue looting in the city, he would not hesitate to cut off his ear and nose at once. The Emperor replied, 'You are invested the supreme authority. Do whatever you think best, without the least hesitation'. The Kotwal of the city was ordered that if there was any row or looting through his negligence in the city he would be hanged. Bakht Khan reported that he had brought with him four infantry regiments, seven hundred cavalry, six horse guns, three field-pieces, etc., etc. As this part of the army had been given its pay for six months in advance and as the general had with him four lakhs of Rupees in cash, the Emperor was assured that he need have no anxiety about money or pay. Not only this, the Emperor was informed that further captures of money would at once be sent to the Royal Treasury. The emperor distributed sweet-meat worth four thousand Rupees amongst the Sepoys. The Sepoys of Agra, the regiments of Nasirabad, of Jallundhar, all are under the command of Bakht Khan. The general ordered that every citizen in the city should be armed. All householders and shopkeepers should keep arms. And those who had none should, at once, ask for them at the Supreme Thana and they would be given them free. But none should be found without arms. Any Sepoy who would be found looting would be deprived of his hand. Bakht Khan went to the armoury and, after examining it, got the arms and powder-magazines properly arranged. At eight in the night, the general went to the place. The Emperor, with Begum Zinad Mahal, Hakeem Ahsanullah Khan, and Ahmad Kuli Khan, discussed the state affairs. In the general parade on the 3rd of July, nearly twenty thousand Sepoys were present."3 
While the arrival of Bakh Khan was giving the Revolution in Delhi some sort of organisation, in the English camp too, men of energy and initiative were arriving from the Panjab and other places. The English government had very few men with them who could surpass, in energy or 
3 Native Narratives by Metcalfe, page 60. 
ability; the brave Brigadier-General Chamberlain who had just arrived from the Panjab. The famous military engineer, Baird-Smith, too, came there. All the men who distinguished themselves in the Sikh War were sent from the Panjab by John Lawrence to help the English army at Delhi. Then, General Barnard decided to try once more the "straight and bold" assault on Delhi which had been so many times thought of and given up in the last. Even as in the past, this assault too was perfectly planned. And on the 3rd of July, the English army, all the while standing ready to march, did begin to move - but, lo! Someone has just brought the news that General Bakht Khan was spared them all the trouble of marching on Delhi; for he himself has marched upon them! On the 4th of July, Bakht Khan again came forth and pressed on the English rear as far as Alipur itself! 
That, the city of Delhi, about which the English had been openly boasting before the siege began that to see it was to conquer it, should not allow him even to take one step further on in spite of new forces pouring from the Panjab to his help, even after the constant struggle of a complete month, was too much of an anxiety and shame to the sensitive nature of Barnard. The English were so eager to take Delhi and so confident of their ability to do so that long before June had ended, the news of the fall of Delhi would reach Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras! And, no sooner did this usual news prove as usually groundless than the English people all over India would begin to ask each other, “What are the English forces doing at Delhi, at all?” This anxiety and shame were working on the mind of Barnard. And to this gloomy view of the past there could be seen nothing in the future but a still darker sequel! He was not allowed even a moment’s rest by the constant attacks of the Sepoys; nor could he fail to see that every day that rose was lessening the hope of carrying any bold or straight assault on the city of the Revolutionaries. At last, Barnard, the commander of the British forces, emaciated in body and eaten up in mind by this hopelessness and dark despair, fell an eary victim to cholera, on the 5th of July. This 
came up like a shock over the English forces in the camp. This was the second commander of the English forces who tried to enter the city of 
Delhi but succeeded only in entering the grave, instead! General Reed, now, took up the charge and became the third commander of the English forces! 
While the British camp was busy in planning assaults, the people of Delhi were busy in actually carrying them out. All of them cannot be described here for want of space. Yet, the sortie of the 9th of July and again that of the 14th of July, and the doggedness with which the Revolutionaries fought, and the bravery with which the English and revolutionaries fought are too important and inspiring to be omitted without any remark. On the first day, the English cavalry was actually routed and driven back. The English artillery was silenced. A brave Sepoy threw Hill and his horse down on the ground. Hill, recovering himself, drew his sword, while three Sepoys jumped upon him. Hill tried to shoot twice and twice he missed, while one of the Sepoys succeeded in snatching away his sword. They closed in hand-to-hand fight; they struggles; down they came. Hill was lying on the ground and the Sepoy was standing with one foot planted on Hill's breast and with sword drawn in his hand. Major Tombs saw this from a distance of nearly thirty feet; he aimed and shot at the Sepoy and killed him. Major Tombs raised Hill from the ground and began to move him off, but saw, to his utter dismay, that yetanother Sepoy had picked up the pistol of Hill and was coming towards him. The Sepoy, single-handed, fought with two or three Englishmen, wounded one with the sword, killed the second, and was himself struck down by the sword of a third. Tombs and Hill, both of them got the "Victoria Medal" for this brave encounter, and Sir John Kaye says that the brove Sepoy, too, ought to have got the "Bahadur Shah Medal"! How many must have deserved the Bahadur Shah Medal for their 
brave martyrdom in that War of Independence! But this, too, is equally true, that those that are so brave and so self-sacrificing get, if not the Bahadur Shah medal, yet the nobler one, the Duty medal of Martyrdom, even from the hands of Death himself! On this day, the English soldiers were disgracefully routed! But unable to avenge this on the Revolutionaries, these brave people went back to their camp and wreaked their vengeance on the poor innocent bhishtis (water-carriers) and other Indians in their service, by actually cutting them down to death in cold blood!"4 And yet it was these bhishtis and others who had kept the English army in fighting condition! But the English were worsted still more terribly in the attack of the 14th of July. For, on this day, the brave Chamberlain was shot dead by a Sepoy. "The first warrior in our camp, the first in fame, the first in honour! Woeful the day when our Chamberlain was carried back to the camp wounded mortally! - " such is the language with which the English historians express the fullness of their grief at this their national loss. 
Thus, the 15th of July passed off and still the proud towers of Delhi were carrying their flags and banners, resplendent in the rays of the sun, proclaiming to the world that the city had now become the abode of Freedom! At last, Reed himself resigned and retired to the Himalayan hills to avoid a sure death! This was the third commander of the English forces. Two were put into the grave; the third could survive simply by resigning the charge - still Delhi could not be taken! The chiefs of the staff, Quartermaster-General Becher and Adjutant-General Chamberlain were laid down in the camp expecting their death every moment - still Delhi could not 
4 "It is related that, in the absence of tangible enemies, some of our soldiery, who turned out on 
this occasion, butchered a number of unoffending camp-followers, servants, and others who 
were huddling together, in vague alarm, near the Christian church-yard. No loyalty, no fidelity, 
no patient good service on the part of these good people could extinguish, for a moment, the 
fierce hatred which possessed our white soldiers against all who wore the dusky livery of the 
East." - Kaye and Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, p. 438. 
be taken! Nay, even the question of self-defence is getting more and more hopeless by the constant and harassing attacks of the Revolutionaries who numbered, by now, more than twenty thousand! Even if the Revolutionaries lost more men in the encounters, yet the English could reap absolutely no advantage. But the death of even a handful of their number perceptibly weakened their strength. For this reason, the English determined to remain only on the defensive. For, defeats in these assaults could neither weaken the Revolutionaries nor put a stop to their further assaults. But, on the contrary, they grew more determined and fearless and did openly boast, “Even a success is costing the English as much as a defeat!” Even the English people themselves all over India began to write and criticise and complain that “the besiegers themselves are besieged!” And, when, in such straits, even the third commander retired, then, men like Greathead, Chamberlain and Rotton began to give up every hope of attacking Delhi and, in the headquarters itself, the question of actually raising the siege of Delhi began to be discussed! This was the state of the siege of Delhi when the third commander, Reed resigned and the fourth one, Brigadier-General Wilson, succeeded him in the command! 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-II 
HAVELOCK 
WHEN the Sikh Sepoys delivered the Allahabad fort into the hands of the English, instead of into the hands of the Revolutionaries, the English made it a base of operations on their side. There was now no longer the danger of having to carry on all civil and military operations in the North India from a distant centre like Calcutta. Lond Canning decided to shift the capital itself to Allahabad until the Revolution was suppressed and, accordingly, he came in a few days to reside at Allahabad. But, in the meanwhile, came the news of the miserable plight of the English at Cawnpore and their piteous cries for help. General Neill, therefore, kept a small army for protection at Allahabad and sent the rest under Major Renaud to raise the siege of Cawnpore. This deatchment marched on burning villages indiscriminately, on their way. Just then, Havelock was appointed to the command of the Cawnpore army in place of Neill. He arrived at Allahabad towards the end of June. He was a trained and an experienced officer. Fortunately for the English, the war with Persia came to an end about the time when the revolution actually broke out, and the whole English army, under good commanders like Havelock, arrived in India just at the time when they were very badly wanted. Though Neill was extremely chagrined to find that Havelock superseded him as the chief officer at Allahabad and that he had to be under him, he did not allow his private feelings to come in the way of the welfare of his country's rule in India. He made vigorous efforts towards the equipment of the army. He gave every help to the army which was to be commanded by Havelock, made all arrangements as to the commissiariat, and quietly handed over the charge of the troops to Havelock when the latter officer arrived. This army was now fully prepared to go to the assistance of the English at Cawnpore. Havelock was eager to start, when suddenly news came that Sir Hugh Wheeler was defeated and had surrendered and that all the Englishmen, including him, had been massacred on the banks of the Ganges! 
Havelock determined to revenge their death and set out in haste from Allahabad towards Cawnpore. He had with him one thousand select English infantry, one hundred and fifty Sikhs, a picked detachment of English cavalry, and six guns, all desperate with rage. There were, also, several civil and military officers going along with them, officers whose life had been saved consciously and deliberately by the revolted Sepoys and the people, out of mercy, or who had escaped their vigilance, and who now came to give information about the geography of the country to the new officers and men, to fight along with them and to wreak a terrible vengeance. And these brave Englishmen, whom one word of a Sepoy would have despatched from this earth, who would have been dead by now but for their mercy, now came together and started the campaign of burning villages wholesale. 
When the news came to Cawnpore that a detachment under Major Renaud was marching towards Fattehgurh, Nana Sahib sent some troops in that quarter. Hoping to crush the small detachment in a short time, this army under Jwala Prasad and Tikka Singh reached Fattehgurh. But, by that time, Havelock's army had joined Major Renaud and the united English army fired their guns as soon as they heard that the Revolutionaries had come. When the small Revolutionary force rushed into the field, confident of crushing Major Renaud in no time, it found arrayed against it the whole army of Havelock, together with artillery and all necessaries. This was on the 12th of July. They were, thus, completely taken by surprise. The fight began and they had to retire from the field leaving their guns behind them. Pursuit was impossible and the English army gave up the idea and entered the town of Fattehpur. At the time of the rising in Fattehpur, the leadership of the Revolution had been taken up by a deputy magistrate in the English employ, a Mahomedan named Hikmat Ullah. English officers had also been 
killed there. The sword of English revenge now fell on that town. The former magistrate of the town, Sherer, who had been spared his life by the Revolutionaries and let off, now came with the army and was not eager to exercise his power of magistracy, so long in abeyance. So, a looting by the military was ordered, first of all. When it was certain that nothing more remained in the tow worth looting, the order was given to set fire to it; but the honour of this work was left to the Sikhs. So, when the Ednglis troops left, the Sikh troops performed their allotted task, set fire to the whole town and followed them. 
When the English army burnt alive the whole town of Fattehpur, the fumes spread along and, at last, reached Cawnpore. The news reached Nana Sahib's camp that the detachment which attacked Major Renaud's force was suddenly set upon by Havelock's army and that, after routing them. The English had entered the town and destroyed the whole city by first looting the place and then, burning alive the people in it. The whole of the Cawnpore Durgar was excided with rage and fury. Just when it was decided to send another army under Nana Sahib himself to obstruct the English march on Cawnpore at the Pandu river, it was announced that some traitors who had deserted to the English had just been arrested.5 At their trial it was proved that some of them had carried letters from the women prisoners at Gawnpore to the English at Allahabad. When the news spread 
5 "After the defeat of Nana Sahib's forces at Fattehpur, some reputed spies were brought to the 
Nana Sahib. They were accused of being the bearers of letters supposed to have been written to 
distant stations by the helpless women in prison. In the correspondence, some of the Mahajans 
and Baboos of the city were believed to be complicated. It was, therefore, resolved that the said 
spies together with the women and children, as also the few gentlemen whose lives had been 
spared should all be put to death." Narrative of the Revolt, page 113. One of the Christian 
prisoners in the prison of Nana Sahib tells the same account and one of the Ayahs (nurses) 
deposes to the same effect. 
that those whom Nana had saved from massacre as "women" were maintaining secret, treacherous correspondence with the English at Allahabad, the important question arose as to what would be done to them. As the English burnt Fatehpur, why not avenge it by destroying this "Bibigarh" (Palace of Females) in return? 
Though the prison was called Bibigarh, there were, also, some men in it saved by the intervention of Nana Sahib. After the unanimous resolution that these prisoners, along with the traitors who carried the correspondence, should all be killed, the dreadful meeting of the dreadful night adjourned. Next day, the spies and the Englishmen were dragged out of the prison and made to stand in a line. At first, the spies were decapitated with swords, in the presence of Nana Sahib himself; then, the Englishmen were shot. When Nana Sahib left the place, people came up to the corpses and mocked, "This is the Governor of Madsras; this of Bombay, and this of Bengal." 
When this grim mockery was going on here, the order was sent to the Sepoys at Bibigarh to kill all the inmates. When the warders would not dare to do it, it was resolved to bring someone of greater mettle as regards cruelty. The chief wardress of Bibigarh, Begum Sahib, sent a man to the butcher quarter of the Cawnpore city. In the evening, some butchers, brandishing naked swords and big knives in their hands, entered the prison gesticulating in rage. They entered about evening and came out when it was just beginning to be dark. But, in 
that short space of time, there was a regular stream of red blood within the prison! As soon as they entered, they stabbed right and left and killed about one hundred and fifty English women and children! The room was a lake of blood with pieces of human flesh swimming in it. When they went in, the butchers walked on the ground; but when they came out, they had to wade through blood. The night was wailing with the screams of the half-dead, the deep groans of the dying, and the piteous cries of a few 
children who escaped on account of their size in the general massacre. About dawn, the unfortunate creatures were dragged out of Bibigarh prison and pushed into a neighbouring well. A couple of children, so long crushed under the weight of the dead bodies, got out near the well and began running away. A blow threw them also dead on the heap of the dead. Men drank water so long from the well, but the well now drank human blood. As the English had thrown to the skies the screams of brown women and children at Fatehpur, so, the Pandays threw the screams and the corpses of white women and children into the deep down! The account between the two races, extending over a hundred years, was thus being settled!6 Even the Bay of Bengal might, in ages, be filled up; but the yawning well of Cawnpore – never! 
About the same time, Havelock was pushing forward after defeating the army sent by Nana Sahib at Pandu nadi. Commander Bala Sahib Peshwa, brother of Nana Sahib, was hit by a bullet in the shoulder, in a skirmish, and returned to Cawnpore. Nana Sahib called together a council of war to settle the future plan of campaign. The question was discussed whether Cawnpore should be evacuated without fight or a strong resistance should be offered to the English advance; and, at last, after a long discussion, the latter alternative was decided upon. On the 10th July, the English army came near Cawnpore. The news of the Cawnpore well had not reached them. Though Wheeler's fort was gone, they had a strong intention of rescuing Bibigarh. With this desire, they did not rest a moment in spite of fatigue, sun, and strife. When the turrets of Cawnpore came into view, Havelock was inspired all the more by these hopes. He sent reconnoitring parties to spy the army of the Pandays. That army was so splendidly 
6 “The refinements of cruelty – the unutterable shame – with which, in some chronicles of the day, this hideous massacre was attended, were but fictions of an excited imagination, too readily believed without inquiry, and circulated without thought. None was mutilated, none were dishonoured......... This is stated, in the most unqualified manner, by the official functionaries, who made the most diligent enquiries into all the circumstances of the massacres in June and in July.” – Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 281. 
arranged on the field that the English warrior who had spent all his life on the battlefield perceived that there were some men, among the Revolutionaries, of extraordinary military skill. He called together his officers and drew out for them, with his sword, on the ground a map of his plan of attack. While Havelock was explaining to them that, instead of a front attack, the Revolutionary left wing should be attacked first, Nana Sahib, mounted on a white horse, joined the efficiently arranged troops of the Revolutionaries. From the English camp, the figure of Nana Sahib could be seen distinctly galloping into the different ranks and encouraging the soldiers. About noon, the English attack on Nana Sahib’s left wing commenced. To check this fierce, sudden the unexpected attack on the left, the Revolutionary artillery began fire. As the English artillery was a little late in arriving, these guns did very effective work. But when Havelock, irritated, by the success of the Revolutionaries, began to push forward again in desperate vigour and when the Highlanders, with turned eyes, ran straight to the guns and when the English, without going back an inch, rushed forth with the cry, "Death or Victory!", then, the left wing became quite unable to resist the united, sudden and orderly attack and retreated, leaving their guns behind. While the left was retreating, the English artillery had defeated the right wing. Seeing the English army victorious, the Revolutionaries began the retreat along the road to Cawnpore. But, with the courage of despair, Nana Sahib rallied them and, with the rest of the guns, renewed the fight. At this time, Nana Sahib made marvellous efforts to encourage and lead the Sepoys "Such was the battle of Cawnpore. The Revolutionaries fought very well. Some of them did not retire even when sword clashed with sword. They saved their guns with determination and the firing was, also, splendidly airmed."7 One more assault from the English side, and even this desperate resistance became in vain and the defeated Revolutionaries retreated towards Brahmavarta. On the 17th of July, Havelock's victorious army entered the city of Cawnpore. Havelock and his army who had brought 
7 Red Pamphlet. 
up to Cawnpore the first wave of victory, to revive the lost English prestige were blessed by Englishmen, both in India as well as in England. Everywhere in England, in the street-corners, on sign-boards of shops, on the walls of public- houses, Havelock's name was engraved! 
When the permission to loot Cawnpore was given, hundreds of English officers and soldiers, along with the Sikhs, fell upon Cawnpore like vultures on a wounded lion. At Bibigarh, the spot was clotted with blood and there was a suspicion that it was English blood that had been split there. Therefore, a large number of Brahmins in Cawnpore were caught and those of them against whom there was any suspicion of complicity with the Revolution were sentenced to death. Not merely that, but, before being hanged, they were made to lick off, with their tongue, the blood spots and, then wash away the stains, broom in hand. The reason of giving this unheard-of punishment to those about to be hanged is thus given by an English officer : “I know that the act of touching Feringhi blood and washing it with a sweeper’s broom degrades a high caste Hindu from his religion. Not only this but I make them to do it because I know it. We could not wreak a true revenge, unless we trample all their religious instincts under foot, before we hang them, so that they may not have the satisfaction of dying as Hindus.” In the massacres ordered by the Revolutionaries, not only no religious injuries were inflicted on the English, but they were always given time, when they requested so, to read the Bible before they were killed. But the English clean took away, so far as they could, from the Revolutionaries who were massacred at Cawnpore and Delhi, all consolations of religion. But many gallant men, even in this misery, embraced death with a smile for the sake of their principle and made sacred the gallows on which they were hanged. Charles Ball says: "General Havelock began to wreak the terrible vengeance for the death of Sir Hugh Wheeler. Batch of natives mounted the scaffold. The calmness of mind and nobility of demeanour which some of the Revolutionaries showed at the time of death was such as would do credit to those who martyred themselves 
for devotion to a principle. One of them, who worked as a magistrate at Cawnpore under Nana Sahib, was arrested and put on his trial. But, he seemed to indifferent to all the proceedings as if they all referred to someone else and not to him. After he was sentenced to death, he rose and turned his back to the judge and walked with a firm step to the scaffold erected for him; while the Maungs were making the final preparations, he was looking at their movements in an easy and natural manner. And without the least agitation, he mounted the scaffold even as a Yopgi enters Samadhi! Fortified by the assurances of his creed, death to him was but a transition from the hated association of the infidel Feringhis to the blissful enjoyment of paradise."8 While the British army entered Cawnpore and was taking revenge ad libitum, Havelock praised the small army consisting of English and Sikhs for having fought bravely in an orderly, compact, and determined manner. Soon after this, General Neill also arrived at Cawnpore, having left a sufficient English garrison at Allahabad. When these two English officers of equal rank came together, each of them would have the desire of having all the troops under his control and there was a possibility of more disorder in the already disorderly English army. Seeing this, Havelock told Neill plainly on the latter’s arrival. “General Neill, it is better that we should understand each other clearly. So long as I am here, the whole commandis mine and you should not give any orders.” In order that English interests might not suffer through the personal jealolusy of the two officers, Neill remained to guard Cawnpore and Havelock marched towards Oudu at the head of the troops going for the relief of Lucknow. Neill hit upon a new plan for the defence of Cawnpore. He formed a corps of Mahars and gave the town in their charge. The trick of inciting these low class men against the higher claseds succeeded wonderfully. When the division among the 
8 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 388. . 
Hindus and Moslems vanished, this caste difference was thus made use of! After the defeat of Cawnpore, Nana Sahib Peshwa left Brahmavarta and crossed the Ganges with his treasure and his army. His first camp was at Fattehgarh; the English army under Havelock, not being able to ascertain Nana's whereabouts, marched towards Lucknow. By the end of June, the whole province of Oudh was a perfect beehive of the Revolutionaries, and it was not easy task to march through the province and to relieve Sir Henry Lawrence and raise the siege of Lucknow. Still, in the flush of victory, Havelock and his army thought lightly of the work of crossing the Ganges and relieving Lucknow. Just as the idea, "to see Delhi was to conquer Delhi", possessed the English army which dedscended from the Panjab, so, the idea that it was only necessary to corss the Ganges in order to take Lucknow now haunted Havelock's army going up from Cawnpore. It is true Lucknow is not very far from Cawnpore. It is also true that the energy and quickness which was displayed by Havelock on his march from Allahabad to Cawnpore inspited him to undertake stupendous tasks with a light heart. But now, there was not an inch of space in Oudh that was not involved in the flames of the national Revolution. Oudh being the cradle of the Purbhayya Sepoys who began the revolt in India, the parents, the children and relatives, and friends of these Sepoys, in every hamlet and every cottage, were inevitably burning with Revolutionary spirit. Still, this terriblestate of affairs did not daunt the English commander who was full of his victory. He was in such high spirits that he hoped to conquer Lucknow at the very sight thereof, then to march to Delhi and, after taking it, to go to Agra! With such confidence, Havelock, with two thousand English troops and ten guns, crossed the Ganges on the 25th of July. General Neill stayed at Cawnpore and Havelock marked towards Lucknow. Such was the disposition of the English troops at the end of July, 1857. 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-III 
BEHAR 
THE province of Behar and its capital, Patna, did not remain aloof from the wave of Revolution which was sweeping over the North- Western Provinces, Allahabad, Agra, and Bengal. Of the different districts in the province, the chief towns were Gaya, Arrah, Chapra, Motihari, and Muzzafferpore. The army to control the province was stationed near Patna, in the town of Danapur. There was the 7th, 8th, and 40th native infantry and, to keep these in check, there were the European artillery and a European regiment, all under the command of Major-General Lloyd; besides, there was the 12th native cavalry regiment under Major Holmes stationed near by, at Sigwali. 
The historical town of Patna was the centre of the powerful Wahabi sect of the Moslem religion. The English commissioner, Tayler, was certain that Patna would take part in the Revolution of 1857, and he therefore kept a close watch on the leaders of that sect. The town of Patna which thoroughly hated the English yoke had started a secret society with the object of overthrowing the English power as far back as 1852. This secret society had amonst its members influential and rich merchants, bankers and Zemindars, a fact which gave the society immense funds for its work. As prominent Moulvies accepted leading positions in the society, the work soon assumed a grave turn. They had correspondence and communication with the secret society at Lucknow as well as with the Sepoys at Danapur. The whole town of Patna, from the police officers down to humble booksellers, was anxious and eager for the moment when the first blow was to be struck against the English power. 
Patna was the headquarters of the secret society and the organisation counted amongst its members representatives of all classes in the vast population of the town. To the mass of the people, the word "Feringhi" itself was as gall and wormwood. They had no lack of funds and even sent some money to the distant frontier districts in the west to organise a Revolution against the English. Since the police had also joined, the nightly secret meetings went on without a hitch. The various members of the society employed hundreds of Revolutionaries in their service under various pretexts and paid them out of the funds of the society. While Patna was, thus, burning with the hatred of Feringhi rule, its flames were spreading in all directions in the vast province, giving secret inspiration to the people. Soon, communication was established with the Sepoys stationed for the protection of the province, with the Zemindars, Rajas, with the chief towns in the various districts, and all were hand and glove with the secret society at Patna. The Sepoys in the camp at Danapur began to hold secret meetings and form plans at nights, under cover of the trees! And if they saw some Englishman who might have discovered them on his patrol, they killed him! When the power of the people was thus organised and ready for Revolution, negotiations began with the secret societies at Delhi and at Lucknow. 
When the final question was being discussed as to the time when they were to start the Revolution, the English commissioner, Mr.Tayler, got the news of Meerut. Following closely came the news that there was unrest among the Sepoys at Danapur. The commissioner was a clever man and thought the whole of India was rising in Revolution, the Sikhs were yet confirmed traitors. Therefore, Tayler immediately sent two hundred Sikhs under Rattray for the defence of Patna, and the Sikhs, accordingly left for Patna. But, wherever they passed, all the way they were despised and cursed, day and night! They were accused of treachery (Nimal-haram) to the nation and, on the way, villagers would ask them sarcastically, "Are you true Sikhs or Feringhi converts?" They were advised, secretly and openly, to stand up for their country when the crucial moment came. When the Sikhs, with the curses of the whole province on their heads, began to enter the town of Patna, the popular fury became intense everywhere on seeing them; every citizen of the proud city ostentatiously avoided the touch, even of their shadow. What more - the priest of the Sikh temple in that freedom- loving city curtly refused entry to these traitors within the temple! The belief that these Sikhs, were not real followers of Guru Govind Singh - a belief shared by the Sikh Guru, the Mahomedan Moulvie, and the Hindu Prayagwal - is an excellent proof how, in the town of Patna, the ideals of Swadharma and Swaraj were really in unison.9 
When the Sikh army came into Patna, Tayler proceeded to try and nip in the bud the Revolutionary activities in the province. The conduct of Waris Ali, the police Jamadar of the Tirhut district, apeared suspicious and the authorities suddenly surrounded his house and made him prisoner. This Jamadar in the English service was just then writing a letter to a Revolutionary leader at Gaya, called Ali Karim! On the evidence of the Revolutionary correspondence seized in his house, he was, soon after, sentenced to death. When he was brought to the scaffold, he shouted, “If there is any real devotee of Swaraj here, let him liberate me!” But, before his request could be heard by the devotees, his lifeless body was hanging from the scaffold! 
The Mahomedan leaver, Ali Karim, was also ordered to be arrested and a European detachment was sent for the task. When Mr.Lowis, the head of the detachment, came up to Ali Karim, the latter mounted his elephant and an exciting race began! But, the spectators soon tropped their impartiality and exceeded the bounds of fair play.The neighbouring villagers, seeing the Feringhis chasing a countryman, began to harass the 
9 "As soon as the Sikhs entered the town, a wild Fakir rushed forward into the road and, with 
savage menaces and threatening gestures, reviled them as traitors and accursed " 
- Patna Crisis by Tayler. 
former, misdirected them on their way, and, at last, even stole one of their ponies! The English officer “irritated by fatigue and despair,” left it to his Indian servant to chase the swift Karim and returned the next day, not having achieved his task. The servant also, being an English-hater, let Karim alone and came back to his master with a sorry face. While these arrests were going on in the province, Mr. Tayler came to know the names of several leaders in the city and he resolved to surprise them. The Revolutionary secret meetings used to take place in the house of the leaders at night and, though Tayler had no definite information about the names of the persons who were implicated in, or the general programme formed, still he had no doubt about the complicity of three most influential Mullahs of the place. He thought it necessary to arrest them at once. However, there was the fear that an attempt to arrest them openly would, perhaps, precipitate the revolt he wanted to suppress. So, the honest officer struck upon a new plan. One day, select citizens were hospitably invited to Mr. Tayler's house to confer with him on important political matters. When all the guests had arrived, he came up with the Sikhs; and when, after some conversation the company were taking leave to depart, Tayler stopped the three Moulvies, who were also among the guests, and informed them smilingly that, as it was dangerous to leave them at liberty in the then troublous times, they were arrested! However, this act was applauded everywhere on the the pretext that it was for the good of the English power and all admired Tayler's energetic action. 
After having thus arrested the prominent Revolutionary leaders without shedding a drop of blood, Tayler decided to strike at the town of Patna, while it was still confused at the suddenness of the arrests. He therefore issued an order to disarm the town and prohibited the people from leaving their houses after 0 P.M. This order rendered the nightly meetings of secret societies impossible. The storing of arms, also, became difficult. So long, the Revolutionary society at Patna was awaiting the signal to rise from Danapur. But, when this life-killing procedure began, they resolved to rise 
suddenly and boldly rather than be crippled by it. On the 3rd of July, Mussalmans began to crowd towards the house of a leader, Peer Ali by name. They entered his house and settled their plans. In a short time, they came out one by one, with green flags and shouts of "Din, Bolo! Din!" About two hundred Jehadis came out in procession and attacked the church. Just then, a white man, called Lyall, was seen coming with sone troops, and Peer Ali shot him dead, and his infuriated followers hacked his body to pieces beyond recognition! But, Rattray came with his "loyal" Sikhs and made a desperate attack on the Revolutionaries. When the Sikhs thrust their swords in the body of the Mother, when their bodies became red with her blood, then, the handful of Revolutionaries were soon broken up by the force of superior discipline and arms. The English arrested the Revolutionary leaders one after another, among them being Peer Ali who had shot Lyall. 
Peer Ali was originally a resident of Lucknow but had lately established himself as a bookseller in Patna. He had imbibed the ideas of independence by reading the books which he used to sell. The conditions of dependence and slavery became unbearable to him. He placed himself in communication with the Revolutionaries at Delhi and Lucknow. He imparted to others his passionate patriotism. Though he was only a humble bookseller, he had great influence in the Revolutionary councils of Patna. He collected together a large number of armed men with the help of the wealthy members of the secret society and they were all sworn to rise against the British power at a given signal. When the English officer at Patna, Mr. Tayler, began torture and oppression, Peer Ali's hot nature could not keep quiet. He was by nature stern spirited, and brave. He could not bear to see the tortures of his countrymen and therefore he, as he confessed later, "rose prematurely." Next, we see Peer Ali sentenced to death, severely handcuffed, his hands bleeding from his founds. He stood before the scaffold, with a heroic smile on his face, defying the death that was awaiting him. There was only a slight sob when he took the name of his beloved son. 
Immediately, the English officer, to take advantage of his emotion, addressed him these words : "Poor Ali, you might even now save your life by disclosing the names of the other leaders." Turning calmly to the Feringhi he replied in bold and noble words, "There are some occasions in life when it is desirable to save one's life - but there are some others when it is more desirable to sacrifice it! This moment is one of the latter kind, when to embrace death at once is the means of eternal life!" Then, describing in plain language the numerous acts of injustice and oppression committed by the English, the martyr dying for his people said, "You might hand me, you might hand other men like me; but, you cannot hand our ideal. If I die, thousands of heroes will rise out of my blood and will destroy your kingdom."10 With these propetic words, this hero, without casting the shadow of a shame on his country, entered by the door of death into the circle of patriots of immportal memory! 
"Out of my blood will rise thousands of heroes!" These last words of the noble martyr could not be falsified, were not falsified! At the news of his death, the "most loyal" regiment at Danapur rose in revolt on the 25th of July. In spite of the presence of an English regiment and English artillery, the three Indian regiments, with their hands, tore away in disgust the Company's uniforms and marched away to the Shon river. On account of the fear and old age of Major-General Lloyd, the chief officer of the place, trhe English armyt did not dare to pursue the Sepoys. Though the English major-general was thus handicapped by old age, still, in the direction in which the revolted regiments were marching, there is palace of Jagadishpur 
10 The Commissioner Tayler himself says : “Peer Ali himself was a model of a desperate and determined fanatic, Repulsive in appearance, with a brutal and sullen countenance, he was calm, self-possessed, almost dignified in language and demeanour. He is the type of the class of men whose unconquerable fanaticism renders them dangerous enemies and whose stern resolution entitled them, in some respects, to admiration and respect!” 
was an old hero who, in spite of age, had the spirit of youth in his arms and his sword, and who was proudly twirling his moustache. It is to his banner that the Sepoys were hurriedly flocking! 
There was almost always one great defect which often nullified the efforts of the freedom- loving Sepoys and people, and that was the want of capable leaders. In the Shahabad district, at least, the Jagadishpur palace had removed this want, and therefore the Depoys marched thither after crossing the Shon river. For, there the Sepoys could find a leader befitting the battle of Swaraj. A man of heroic spirit, of unconquerable valour, and born in a Rajput family of ancient fame, this leader of the Swaraj war graced the name of Kumar Singh by wearing it. His lordship over the extensive Shahabad lands had been established by the continuity of ages and the people there felta natural love towards his ancient family. Storms of great empires rose and subsided in the land of Hindusthan from time to time; but, through all those cruel vicissitudes, this province was free under its beneficent Rajput princes and continuously enjoyed freedom and Swaraj. Through all the most oppressive seasons of a hundred Revolutions, the Banyan tree of the dynasty of Kumar Singh had been bearing all the inclemencies of heat and cold on its summit, but had never ceased to protect the humble birds that nested in its branches. Summer heat might scorch the top; winter frost might bite the leaves; but the birds enjoyed the quiet of eternal spring for endless generations. The dynasty loved the subjects like its own children; the subjects worshipped the dynasty as the representative of God upon earth. But, to the foreign despot, this reciprocal loyalty and kindness was a thorn in his side. He therefore determined to ruin this royal family! All of a sudden the chattra of Swaraj was broken and the province was laid bare; the tree was struck by the cruel lightning and the birds began to flutter about in helpless agony! And it was with a determination of avenge the wrongs of his dynasty and his country that the old youth was standing on the terrace of Jagdishpur palace, twirling his moustache! 
An old youth! - yes, he was an old youth. For, nearly eighty winters had passed over his head and yet the fire in his soul was as fierce as ever and the muscle in his arm was strong. A Kumar of eighty years and a Singh! How could he bear the sight of the spoliation of his country by the English! After Dalhousie swallowed the kingdom of Oudh, the English went about, throughout Hindusthan, digging up and demolishing all raised placed in order to raze them all to the ground. It was in that campaign that Kumar Singh's country also fell a victim. Kumar Singh swore that he would shatter to pirces the English rule which had ruined his country and Swaraj in this inexcusable, cruel, and unjust manner! And he began at once communications with Nana Sahib. 
Commissioner Tayler of Patna had, for long, been receiving information that Kumar Singh was planning a Revolution that he had established communications with Revolutionary societies throughout India, and that hundreds of Sepoys at Patna were secretly in league with him. The very idea, however, that this old man of eighty would run to the battle-field, instead of lying down for a peaceful death, appeared to his mind absolutely impossible. Besides, was not Kumar Singh always writing letters of loyalty to him? Still, Tayler who was not an exception to the usual nobility of heart of Englishmen wrote to Kumar Singh : "You are very old and your health is very bad! I feel great anxiety for your company for the rest of your days. I will feel very much obliged if you will do me the honour of accepting my hospitality. 
With the hope that this invitation will not be rejected, - I am yours etc., Tayler." In the past Afzul Khan had sent a similar invitation to Shivaji! The astute Rajput at once understood that the loving invitation of the commissioner meant only the quiet opening of the prison door! Therefore, he wrote back: "Thanks awfully! It is true, as you say, that my health is very bad; and, therefore, it is that I cannot come to Patna just now. As soon as I feel better, I will start immediately". O Kumar Singh! You are, indeed, uneasy in mind and body! And it is also true that, when you feel 
better after shedding Feringhi blood, you are going to Patna! But, for what ? That is a different question. 
Just then came the revolted Danapur Sepoys with the medicine to cure Kumar Singh. "Why do you wait now, oh Kumar Singh! We bind you by the oath of the Motherland, by the oath of our religion, of your honour! Throw away the sheath and draw your sword for Swaraj! You are our king, our leader, our general! You are an ornament to Rajput race; you ought, at once, to jump into the battlefield!" Thus cried the Swaraj-loving Sepoys; thus advised the holy Brahmin priests; thus, also, whispered to him his sword, anxious to smite the enemy!11Then, the hero of eighty, who was too weak to go on an elephant to Patna, was suddenly inspired and, from his sickly bed, he jumped right into the battlefield! 
The Sepoys next hurried from Jagadishpur to Arrah, the chief town of the Shahabad district, looted the treasury, and destroyed the English prisons, offices, and flags. At last they turned to a small fortress. The clever Englishmen of the place had stored in that fort arms, ammunition, and stores of provision in order to defend themselves in case of a rising. Besides, a detachment of fifty Sikhs had been sent from Patna to help the handful of Englishmen. While these men, about seventy-five in all, lay waiting in the fort fully prepared, the occasion for which they were waiting arrived and the Revolutionaries besieged the place. 
While these twenty-five Englishmen and fifty Sikhs were trying to defend the fort obstinately, the Revolutionaries, instead of assaulting it, were busy in shutting them completely on all sides. It is probable that they considered the place almost in their hands and did not think it worth while to spend time and men in capturing it by general assault. They probably 
11 "The Brahmins have incited him to mutiny and rebellion!" - Major Eyre's Official 
Despatch. 
thought it more advantageous to look after the surrounding territory and other English camps. Partly for this and partly for the fierce artillery of the besieged, the Sepoys brought up their guns and began to use them instead of ordering a general assault. In one or two places, mines were laid and blown up with dynamite. In a few days, the water-supply in the fort was exhausted. But the Sikhs were too valiant to bear to see the miseries of the English. In twenty-four hours, they dug a new well in the fort! And, while this work was going on, they were, at the same time, fighting like demons. The Europeans would not agree to a conditional surrender, thinking of the fate of their Cawnpore comrades. When the Sepoys discovered that there were Sikhs, besides Feringhis, fighting within the fort, they grew wild with indignation. Because, then it was not alone the Sepoys that were besieging the English but it was Kumar Singh besieging the followers of Guru Govind Singh. The Sikhs were extraordinarily brave but basely treacherous to their country. Every evening, efforts were made to bring them round to their duty. The messengers of the Revolutionaries would stand behind pillars and shout out to them words of advise : "O Sikhs! What hell do you look forward to by thus helping the Feringhis! They who have destroyed our kingdom, they who are violating our Mother-country, they who have insulted our religion! Fighting on their side, what hell do you look forward to?" The Revolutionaries would bind them with oaths of religion, of country, of interest, of freedom. They shouted heart-rending implorations to leavethe side of the Feringhi. They threatened to massacre them if they still persisted in acting treacherously and helping the foreign despots. Not only had all this no effect on the Sikhs, but the reply they would give was a shower of bullets, while the English clapped hands in applause shouting, "Bhale! Bhale!" (Well done!). Thus, the siege went on for three days. On the third night on the 29th, the English force was suddenly awakened by the noise of distant guns. Their faces beamed with smiles. Was it not the English army, coming to kill the Revolutionaries and raise the siege? Yes, it was the English army. About two hundred and seventy Englishmen of the English regiments at Danapur and about one hundred Sikhs under the valiant 
Captain Dunbar had come to the banks of the Shon river to raise the siege. Never was the English army so jubilant and hopeful of victory! The Englishmen and women who had come to see them off bade farewell to them, all smiles. The boats sailed smoothly on the Shon and, about seven in the evening, the army reached the outskirts of Arrah. The bright orb of the waxing moon, also, marched along with them to partake of their victory. Oh, Captain Dunbar! Arrange your troops properly while the moon is shining, for soon it will be dark. In this arrangement, as usual, the "loyal Sikhs" must be put in the front. They also stepped forward lightly. Where is the black guide who is to show the way in the thick jungles of Arrah? Put him forth, and then, oh victorious warriors! mArch on brandishing your swords in the bright moonlight. Trees were left behind, the ground was being covered, mile after mile was being crossed, and even the Arrah bridge is reached. But, what is this? Where is the enemy? How is this, that not a single Revolutionary has yet fallen? The cowards have run away! They have run away at the bare news that Dunbar is coming! Even Alexander did not inspite his enemies with such terror! Oh Moon! You have so long waited in cold and wind to witness the raging battle, but you have only seen the cleverness of the retreat of the Revolutionaries. Go, then; do not stay any longer to be disappointed; draw the curtain of night over this universe and retire to your resting place! But, though the moon went away, you, Dunbar! do not return! Here now comes the mango-grove and there is no more chance of encountering the Pandays. But, oh! What is this sound? May it not be the leaves of the mango-tree shaking in the wind? Whiz! Whiz!! Beware, Englishmen! Beware! A deluge of bullets from all sides! Every tree of the mango-grove had as if guns in its branches, smiting the foreign Feringhis! Kumar Singh is come? The English army is prepared to fight; but, with whom? Not one man on the enemy's side could be seen! In the thick mango- grove, in the weird darkness of the night, in the high and low places, Kumar Sing's soldiers were hidden and not one could be seen! Nothing was visible except the stars in the sky and the trees on the earth! And it was not possible to fire at both these and gain victory! The wind-god was enraged and sent 
red-hot shots from somewhere foaming, into the English army! Fire from the left, fire from the right, and fire in front! The clothes of the English army were white and easily distinguishable but Kumar Singh's men were dark, their clothes were dark, and the night was dark! If all the dark circumstances conspired together, how could the English hold to their feet? The white Englishmen and the dark Sikhs, both ran away from the field! Their commander, Dunbar, was one of the first to be killed. Running for life, the English army came into a ditch near by. There they tried to hold on for some time, but, about early morning, they left behind not only their dead but their wounded comrades on the field and commenced the fight to the Shon river, being thirsty, hungry, full of blood, and black with shame. But it was no easy matter to run away from Kumar Singh. At every step, blood began to flow. As a wild boar pierced by lances, dropping on this side and that through weakness, runs shedding streams of blood on the field - such was the English army when it came to the Shon river. But here, there was the climax of destruction. At first, they could not find their boats. After some time, they found that they had stuck in the sand. Those that there were not so stuck had been set fire to by the Pandays! At last, a couple of boats were saved. When the white population of Danapur came to the bank expecting to greet a victorious army singing war-songs, and bringing with them the rescued men of Arrah, they did not hear a single shout of joy from the boats. No flag, no band, not a single face uplifted! All hearts began to beat in impatience, "My son, my brother, my husband, my father left only yesterday for the field in all hopes; and to-day - God forbid the thought!" Before the prayer could reach Heaven, the unfortunate troops landed on the Ghat at Danapur, and soon the terrible news spread like lightning that, out of four hundred and fifteen men, only about fifty returned alive safe from the hands of Kumar Singh! An Englishman writes, "He who had heard the heart- rending cries of those English women will not forget it to this day! Some began tobeat their breasts, crying piteously, some shouted hoarsely, and some began to pull away their hair. If they had seen General Lloyd, the originator of this destructive plan, there is not the lease doubt that they would have lynched him!" 
But while the sky was being rent by the cries of these women at Danapur, Major Eyre was marching towards Arrah to revenge the defeat and their sorrow. Though he had not yet heard of Dunbar's defeat, he had marched straight towards Arrah, on hearing that the English there were besieged. While Kumar Singh's Sepoys were returning after crushing Dunbar's army on the 29th and 30th of July, they got the news that Eyre was advancing towards Arrah. The old commander got together his troops without losing a moment. He made the arrangements for fighting after taking advantage of every stragetic position on the route, and gave the last desperate battle on the 2nd of August, near the village of Bibiganj. Both armies endeavoured to take possession of a thick forest near by. In this race between youth and age, the aged Kumar Singh arrived first and, thus defeating Eyre's plans, he opened a terrible dire. Eyre had three excellent guns and he was continually advancing on the strength of these. Thrice Kumar Singh's men jumped at the guns. Thrice did they go almost near the mouth of the fire- spitting guns, but the English kept their artillery constantly firing. At that moment, Captain Hastings came up panting to the commander Eyre, and said, "Eyre, even the English infantry is being pushed back! Victory has slipped from us!" If this state had continued for half an hour more, the battle would have been Kumar Singh's. Now, as anyhow the victory was going, the English wanted to try a last desperate attack before leaving the field. In this, Eyre ordered the English force to charge with bayonets. Immediately, the English soldiers rushed like arrows on the Revolutionaries. It cannot be understood why the Sepoys who would bravely rush up to the mouths of guns could not stand a general charge with bayonets, but it is certain that they did not withstand it. Eyre drove them out of the thicket and pushed forward, marched up to the fortress at Arrah, and relieved the Englishmen besieged there. And the town of Arrah thus fell into English hands again. 
The siege of Arrah lasted only for eight days. In these eight days, the brave Rajput had to maintain the siege as well as fight two battles. His extraordinary courage spirit, and bravery were not matched by the bravery of his followers, and so, after suffering defeat at Eyre's hands, Kumar Singh had to retreat to Jagadishpur. But when he heard that the English army, reinforced by the lately besieged troops at Arrah, were swelling considerably, he began to collect together all the available fighting men at Jagadishpur. The English by this time had seen not a little of Kumar Singh's activity. Fearing that he might again march on Arrah, Eyre forestalled him and himself started towards Jagadishpur. Kumar Singh was greatly handicapped and recognised that it was impossible, with his disheartened followers, to oppose in open battle the English army, well- disciplined and victorious, and that, too, near a capital town. He, therefore, decided to use guerilla tactics and, after two sharp skirmishes, came out of Jagadishpur. And Eyre, with the English army, pitched his tent in Kumar Singh's palace on the 14th of August! Though the English destroyed the palace, the Hindu temples, and other buildings at Jagadishpur, still, the idol of the temples, the king of the palaces, and the owner of the buildings, Kumar Singh, was as unconquerable after the battle as before it. Other kings might be cowed down by the fall of their capitals, but the king of Jagadishpur was not of that sort. His motto was, "Wherever I am, there is Jagadishpur!" So, to hold Jagadishpur without capturing him was only a vain endeavour. Now that his home was lost - the battlefield itself had become his home. 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-IV 
DELHI FALLS 
WHEN the third chief commander of the English army before Delhi became hopeless of taking the town and resigned, Brigadier-General Wilson replaced him. At that time, in the camp of the English army maddened by the attacks of the Revolutionaries, it was seriously discussed, in despair, whether the siege should be raised. It is difficult to say what would have been the course of the Revolution of 1857 if this plan had been resolved upon. Still, it is clear that this one movement on the part of the English would have harmed their cause more than many defeats at the hands of the Revolutionaries. The English had a strategic advantage in thus besieging the town of Delhi, because the Revolutionary army was shut up there in one place. If that vast host had spread over the province instead of being thus bottled up and had harassed the English after forming small detachments everywhere, this guerilla warfare would have soon reduced the small English force to impotence. But Delhi being besieged, the battlefield was restricted, the English force had not to put up with an unbearable strain, and the Revolutionaries were inconveniently huddled up together in one city and thus were more liable to attack. In these circumstances, to raise the siege of Delhi was to break the dam and let the Revolutionary forces inundate the whole country. Even if Delhi were captured, the Sepoys would no doubt have spread all around. But there was a vast difference between driving them out of Delhi, defeated and dejected, and making them elated by raising the siege and allowing them to fall upon the English. Though the English commander thoroughly understood this difference, despair, discouragement, and the fierce onslaughts of the Revolutionaries made him think of raising the siege. At that moment, the English power in India hung in the balance. It was, indeed, fortunate for the English that there was, at this time, a bold and desperately courageous officer like Baird-Smith in the 
English camp outside Delhi. When all other officers were thinking of a retreat, he said with determination, "We must not release our hold of Delhi even by an inch! Our noose, fallen round her neck like cruel death, must be constant and thorough! If we raise the siege of Delhi, the Panjab will be out of hand, India will be gone, and the Empire ruined forever!" 
Encouraged by the words of Baird-Smith, Brigadier Willson determined not to turn back without taking Delhi. The Revolutionaries, on the other hand, sustained the siege with rate ability and courage. They would make a sudden sortie, attack either the right or the left wing, kill as many people as possible, and retreat qhickly when the English rose vigorously to repel the attack. When the English army would have been decoyed near the fort in pursuit of the Sepoys, the Revolutionary guns would at once open a tremendous fire. With these tactics, the Revolutionaries so often deceived the English and killed so many of their number that Brigadier Wilson had to issue a special order that on no account was a pursuit of the Sepoys to be attempted. As the English numbers began to dwindle by this new ruse of the Revolutionaries, their commander's eyes were turned towards the expected siege-train from the Panjab. All means of communication in North Hindusthan - telegraphs, railways, and posts - were completely destroyed, and the English army at Delhi was as much besieged as the Revolutionaries. The English had no adequate knowledge as to what was going on in the south of Delhi, or as to where the army sent from Calcutta had arrived, or as to the state of affairs in the towns of Lucknow, Cawnpore, Benares, and other places. A month after Sir Hugh Wheeler was killed, the English army at Delhi god 'reliable' information that he was hastening to come to their help! There was no hope of getting any reinforcements from Calcutta and the whole strain fell upon the Panjab. Sir John Lawrence had borne his burden well and had often sent reinforcements of English as well as Sikh soldiers. This time, too, he did not refuse the new request for a siege-train and more reinforcements but sent two thousand troops under the command of Nicholson. When the news of the arrival of 
this army reached the English camp at Delhi, every face beamed with joy, hope, and encouragement. The fact that Nicholson was the commander encouraged them more than that two thousand soldiers were coming. A leader like Nicholson is worth thousands of soldiers! In the dispirited English ranks, everyone would say, "Now that Nicholson is coming, there is no doubt about the victory!" 
As the acquisition of good leaders removed the doubts as to victory in the English camp, so the lack of good leaders among the Revolutionaries made their defeat more and more certain. The Emperor, whom they had set upon a rejuvenated throne, though of praiseworthy qualities of kindness and mercy fit for times of peace, was quite inexperienced in war and unequal to military leadership. There was no lack of brave Sepoys at Delhi. Those who had even surpassed English troops in warfare when fighting on their side, those who had learnt their drill and discipline under the English themselves, those whose swords had extended English rule right up to Afghanistan - there were fifty thousand of such heroes within the walls of Delhi. But there was wanted at least one capable head to command and lead the victory these fifty thousand men. All honour to these fifty thousand men who fought and failed. The wonder is that they held on for so long without a capable leader to lead them! Even the old Emperor whom they had placed on the throne was as anxious to find a good leader for them as they were themselves. He tried many experiments, but they did not work. He gave all the power in the hands of Bakht Khan. He appointed three generals to manage the army. He then ordered that a committee of six- three Delhi citizens and three Sepoy leaders - should together look after all the affairs of the army. And when this representative council also proved fruitless, the noble and patriotic Emperor, fearing that, perhaps, the Revolution was being destroyed on account of his fault and that capable men were leaving his side on account of his being at the head, announced publicly that he was ready to give up all his power and abdicate. Rather than India come back under the English, rather than the constantly 
wheeling vulture of foreign domination tear the entrails of long - suffering India, rather than India be always submerged in the mire of slavery, the old Mogul proclaimed that the rule of any man over Hindusthan who would give her freedom and Swaraj would be a hundred times more pleasing to him than the continuance of his own rule. He sent letters written in his own hand 
to the Rajas of Jeypore, Jodhpur, Bikaneer, Alwar, etc. " It is my ardent wish to see that the Feringhi is driven out of Hindusthan by all means and at any cost. It is my ardent wish that the whole of Hindusthan should be free. But the Revolutionary War that has been wages for this purpose cannot be crowned with success unless a man capable of sustaining the whole burden of the movement, who can organise and concentrate the different forces of the nation and will unify the whole people in himself, comes forward to guide this rising. I have no desire left in me of ruling over India, after the expulsion of the English, to my own personal aggrandisement. If all of you native Rajas are ready to unsheath your sword to drive away the enemy, then, I am willing to resign my Imperial powers and authority in the hands of any confederacy of the native princes who are chosen to exercise it."12 
This is the letter written by the leader of Indian Mahomedans, the Emperor of Delhi to the Hindu kings in India! This unique and typical letter shows how the noble words - Swatantrya, Swaraj, Swadesh, and Swadharma - were thoroughly understood in Hindusthan. Seeing the religious instincts of Hindus and Mahomedans thus completely united together in patriotic harmony, Charles Ball says, "Such unexpected, surprising, and extraordinary transformation is rarely to be seen in the history of the world!" 
But this extraordinary transformation had been completely effected only in one province of the vast land of Hindusthan, and the immediate result of the Proclamation was not a perfect success. Though it is 
12 Thed autograph letter:- Native Narrative by Metcalfe, p. 226. . 
in the main, and in this sense, true that, before the walls of Delhi, a fight was going on between freedom and slavery, in another and in an important sense, we can say that there never was a true fight there between Indians and Feringhis as such. The author of the famous work The Siege of Delhi, says, “There were four times as many natives as Europeans in the artillery. For every European horseman there were two native horsemen. It was not possible to move a step without the help of the natives.” The vigorous life in one part of the country was killed by the treacherous activity in other parts. In spite of this, even towards the end of August, the Revolutionaries gave the English no opportunity to attack, but always pursued the offensive and continuously directed attacks on the English camp. This is not a mean indication of their devotion to the principle of Swaraj. 
While all this heroic devotion on the part of the Revolutionaries was rendered powerless for want of a capable leader, the camp of the enemy got the advantage of a commander like Nicholson. Now was to be seen, for the first time, a shadow of despair in Delhi. The armies of Neemuch and Bareilly began to accuse each other for the present state of affairs; and riotous Sepoys, though regularly paid clamoured for more pay and threatened to loot the rich men of the town if their demands were not satisfied. Then, at the command of the Emperor, Bakht Khan assembled together the Sepoy leaders, Sepoys, and prominent citizens and asked them the question, "War or surrender!" At once, the cry went ringing up to the sky, "War, War, War!" (Ladhai!) At this display of enthusiasm there was hope everywhere, and the Revolutionary army, not excepting the Bareilly and Neemuch Sepoys, marched towards Najafgarh to attack and carry the English siege-train. After reaching Najafgarh, the Neemuch army would not encamp where the Bareilly brigade was encamped; and, instead of preparing to fall together on the enemy, they disobeyed Bakht Khan's orders and encamped at a neighbouring village. When the English heard this news, the new commander, Nicholson, took a select and sufficient force and marched in all haste towards Najafgarh. He suddenly attacked the Neemuch brigade 
which had encamped at a distance disobeying the orders of Bakht Khan. The Revolutionaries were lying scattered, unprepared, and unformed - the attack was cautious and well-ordered and under the command of Nicholson! The destruction of the Neemuch sepoys was complete. They fought; they fought with great courage; they fought with such bravery that the enemy applauded them. But this was vain bravery! The Revolutionaries had never suffered such a defeat since the battle of Bundelki-Serai. The whole Neemuch brigade fell this day on the field! This was the fruit of self-willed action and disobedience of the orders of their own elected commander! Undisciplined bravery is as useless as cowardice! 
This victory of the 25th of August removed altogether the cloud of despair in the English Camp. This was their only real victory since the month of June. Everyone was anxious now to assault Delhi. Commander Wilson gave the order to Baird-Smith to prepare the plan of the final attack. This Baird-Smith who, by his persistence, had retained the English army at Delhi when it was thinking of raising the siege, prepared the map as ordered. The new siege-train from the Panjab also arrived safely in the English camp. The English commander sent a message to his troops in the following strain. "This city of Delhi has baulked the English army and three generals' military skill for the last three months! The time has certainly come near when your efforts up to now will be rewarded by the razing to dust of that city!" 
After the arrival of reinforcements from the Panjab, the English army consisted of three thousand and five hundred English soldiers, five thousand Sikhs, Panjabees, etc., two thousand and five hundred Kashmiris -- altogether eleven thousand men. Besides, the Raja of Jhind himself was there, with hundreds of his men to assist in the fall of Delhi. In the first half of September, the English commander assumed the offensive andbegan to construct new batteries. This produced consternation among the Delhi Sepoys. While, outside the walls, the English were steadily advancing in good order, inside there was a climax of disorder, anarchy, and disobedience 
among the Indian troops! The Indians on the English sided worked so arduously in the work of constructing the battery, in spite of the artillery- fire of Delhi, that Forrest writes, "The natives excelled in steady and unparallelled bravery. When man after man was being killed, they would keep up their work. If the man in front was killed by a bomb, they would stop for a moment, shed a tear or two for the dead, put the new body in the line of corpses, and begin work again in that terrible place!" The Indians under the English worked with such discipline, while those in the town of Delhi shirked their work. From this difference, what a lesson has to be learnt! Honouring the officers and obeying their word of order is the very essence of discipline. But this principle was being trampled down everywhere at Delhi. Most of the fault lay on the incapable officers and the rest on disorderly sepoys, and, now, there was disheartening despair to crown all! The 14th September came. The English army was divided into four coloumns - three under Nicholson stood on the right to force the Kabul gate and enter Delhi. 
When the sun rose, the English guns which had been so long shattering the walls stopped suddenly. There was a dead silence for a moment in the English camp and immediately the force under Nicholson dashed against the wall. The first column went up to the breach which had been effected in the Kashmir Bastion. From within, the guns of the Revolutionaries kept up a hot fire. The English fell in heaps one upon another in the trenches but some reached the walls. A ladder was placed over the wall and the English army began to scale up the latter. The Revolutionaries fought desperately and shot down hundreds after hundreds of the Feringhi army. But the English force pushed on in spite of the terrible onslaught. At last, the English affected a big breach and carried it. Delhi's walls yielded and the bugle of victory sounded! 
In the same manner, near the breach at the Water-Bastion also, there was a terrible hand to hand fight, and the second column, killing and dying at every step,. Carried the breach and jumbed inside the city. 
The third column was marching towards the Kashmir gate. When Lieutenants Home and Salkeld came in front of the gate to blow it up with dynamite, from the walls, from the windows, from everywhere came a perfect shower of grape. The draw-bridge over the trench in front of the Kashmir gate is broken. Only one plank remains. Enough, march forward on it, one by one! The sergeant is killed, this Mahadoo has fallen - but, Home, rush forth. Home ran forth and placed the dynamite near the gate. Others then rushed forward on the plank to apply the fire to it. Lieutenant Salkeld has fallen, shot by a bullet; rush forth, you, Captain Burgess; why, you are also shot; never mind, the hero has set fire to it, even as he was dying! A terrible crash like thunder! The Kashmir gate was blown up by the terrific force of the dynamite. But even this sound was not heard, in the din of battle, by the English commander who was waiting for the Kashmir gate to open! Should he advance or should he not? But, though he had not heard the bugle of victory, he had not the slightest doubt about the success of the English heroes who had rushed forth. After waiting for a time, he marched forth. With absolute confidence in his soldiers, Campbell gave the order for an assault. The troops came near the ditches. They saw their victorious and dying comrades in the ditches, rushed through the breach in the Kashmir gate, and jumped into Delhi. 
The fourth column under Major Ried had started from the English right to take the Kabul gate. When it reached Sabzi Mandi, it met the Sepoys who had come out of Delhi to oppose it. Major Reid fell in the first encounter, the English advance was checked, there was confusion in the English camp, the Revolutionaries were elated, and it seemed that the English would be routed. But Hope Grant brought up the cavalry and the battle again became equal. Though the English artillery opened a terrible fire from every house and garden of Kishenganj, the Revolutionaries sent bullets flying and shed pools of blood. The English cavalry also found it impossible to advance. But it was also impossible to return for fear that the Revolutionaries might capture the guns. The English cavalry stuck to their posts to die. Not a man moved from his place, except by death. Of the grand bravery and discipline of the Indian cavalrymen, their commander, Hope Grant, says: "The native cavalrymen remained firm. Their valour is unparalleled. When I began to encourage them, they said: Do not be anxious! We will stand this fire as long as you wish!" 
Equal bravery was shown by the Indians who were fighting for love of country and freedom. The infuriated Revolutionaries, fighting every inch of space, made a great effort near the Idgarh. More and more desperate attacks. When the English force, trying to capture Idgarh, was wavering, the Revolutionaries delivered another fierce attack. The English retired. The Revolutionaries pursued, vigorously attacking them all the way, up to their guns and cavalry. Now, at last,. The English forces are leaving the field after abandoning the position which they held so long! Bravo, Revolutionaries, bravo! You have shown a splendid fight! If all of you had been as brave, and as disciplined! - 
While the fourth column was being thus foiled, the three English columns that had entered Delhi waited for a short time at the Kashmir gate and then rushed forth to attack the town. The three chief commanders, Campbell, Jones, and Nicholson, taking their followers, fought their way to the Kabul gate. The guns found in the way were captured; on every tower and pillar was placed a British flag, and the force went fighting right up to the Burn Bastion. But, from this place onwards, instead of empty gund, lifeless hillocks, and vacant fields, they encountered the fierce war-cry of the Revolutionary force. The Revolutionaries opened a terrible fire; fierce bloodshed and death marked every foot of ground they covered; the English army which had advanced far in the heat of victory was forced back beaten. When thus the English force received this check, Nicholson dashed forth like a tiger. His motto was nothing is impossible, in this world, to a brave warrior. When the irritated Nicholson left the Water Bastion and again entered the Gully - the bloody battle was renewed. Whichever Englishman stepped forth was shot down by the Revolutionaries fighting for freedom. 
From the roofs, from the windows, from the porches, from the verandahs, this obstinate, freedom- loving Gully began to pour forth fire and forced even Nicholson to retire. The brave Major Jacob also fell in it! Now, rush forth, Nicholson! All other English officers, except you, have been killed by this Gully! Oh! freedom-loving Gully! Nicholson himself is coming forth - now is the true test! The fight began in a dead encounter. Suddenly, there was a cry in the English army, as if it had been struck by lightning descending upon it! Nicholso, Nicholson! Where is he now? Some brave Sepoy had singled him out and his him - and he was rolling on the ground! There was an uproar - "Hato" (Retire!) in the English army, and "Chato" (Cut down!)" in the Sepoy ranks! The dreadful Gully! Every inch of her length was the grave of an Englishmen! 
Hardly did this column of the English army retreat through this heroic Gully and reach the Kashmir gate, when the bugle also sounded for the retreat of the column which had gone towards Jumma Musjid. Though there was no resistance till the mosque was reached, as soon as the troop came there, a terrible war-cry was heard and, in the subsequent fight, Campbell was wounded. 
Thus ended the first day of the assault on Delhi. Of the four columns, three had their chief commanders wounded; sixty-six officers, and eleven hundred and four soldiers were killed! Reckoning in the evening the advantages gained at this expense, the English commander, Wilson, found that hehad taken only one-forth of Delhi! Fear, despair, and anxiety maddened general Wilson and he said that an immediate retreat must be ordered. "The town is yet unconquered; and thousands of the Revolutionaries are proudly inviting those that remain alive to come forth for battle. Shall we now sacrifice everyone of us or suffer the ignominy of defeat? We must now retreat!" - such was the opinion of Wilson. 
When the dying Nicholson who had been taken to the hospital heard the news, that hero said, "Retreat! By God's grace, I have still strength 
enough in me to shoot the retreating Wilson!" All the living Englishmen agreed with this dying hero and, on the night of the 14th of September, the English troops stuck to the posts they had conquered. 
The English council of war overruled General Wilson's opinion as to retreat. The movements in the Revolutionary camp itself that night showed that the force of the Revolutionaries was spent. One party declared that it was better to give up Delhi and renew the war in the province, and the other insisted that Delhi should never be surrendered, even if everyone of them was killed. In the English camp whatever the diffrerences of opinion, the majority was always respected and the differences were merged in the unanimity of action. This virtue, however, was conspicuous in the confused Sepoy ranks by its absence, and the two parties, instead of uniting to form a common plan of action, went each their own way. Some Sepoys left Delhi, but others resolved not to go back and inch till the end, stuck to Delhi, and came out on the battle-field ready. This party fought for Delhi from the 15th to the 24th of September! And that too, with such determination, such bravery, and such steadiness that, when an English detachment would enter a mosque or a place, a guardsman would stand with his hand on the trigger, would aim calmly when the English came near, and would fire the last shot for his country and religion when they approached him. After doing this last service for his motherland, he would court death! 
When three fourths of Delhi fell into the hands of the English, the commander-in-chief at Delhi, Bakht Khan,went to the Emperor and said, "Delhi has now slipped out of our hands. But this does not mean that all changes of victory are over. Even now, the plan of harassing the enemy in the open country rather than protecting an enclosed place is certain to bring 
victory in the end. I am going to fight my way out of Delhi, after selecting the warriors who are ready to keep their swords drawn till the end in this war of liberty. I think it more advisable to go out fighting rather than surrender to the enemy. At this time, you should also come with us, and 
under your banner, we will fight to the last for Swaraj." If this old Mogul had even a hundredth part of the valour of Babar, Humayun, or Akbar in him, he would have accepted this valiant invitation and would have marched out of Delhi with the valiant Bakht Khan. If he was to die, he would have died like a king. But despairing on account of old age, slow on account of long enjoyment of luxuries, and frightened by defeat, the Emperor Bahadur Shah maintained an undetermined and vacillating attitude till the end. On the last day, he did himself in Humayun's grave, and, after refusing Bakht Khan's invitation, began to decide upon surrender to the English, according to the advice of Ilahi Baksh Mirza. This Ilahi Baksh was a first-class traitor! He gave the news to the English, who immediately sent thither Captain Hodson. After a promise to spare his life, the Emperor surrendered, was brought to the palace by the English, and imprisoned. Just then, the traitorous dogs, Ilahi Baksh and Munshi Rajab Ali, came up running and said, "But the princes are yet hiding in Humayun's tomb!" Again, Hodson ran; the princes surrendered to him, were put in a carriage, and taken to the town. As soon as the cavalcade entered the town, Hodson ran up to the carriage and shouted out that those who killed English women and children deserved death alone. So saying, Hodson turned towards the surrendered princes, who were dragged out of the carriage, and robbed of all valuables on the person, and helpless stood before him. Three shots put an end to the lives of the three princes! Hodson cut away this last sprout of Timur's family! But his revenge was not satisfied by simply shooting dead these illustrious princes. It is only savages that wreak a vengeance till death. If Hodson had stopped there, where would be the humanity of civilised English vindictiveness? Therefore, the dead bodies of the prionces were thrown right before the police station. When the vultures had fed on them for some time, the rotting bodies were dragged and thrown into the river. Oh Time! what changes are wrought by thee! That there should be no one to given the last burial rites to the descendants of the great Emperor Akbar! And now, the Sikhs thought that the prophecy in their books was fulfilled! But, in what way? By what means? To what end? For whose benefit? 
Then began terrible looting and a general massacre at Delhi. After hearing the accounts, Lord Elphinstone writes to Sir John Lawrence, "After the siege was over, the outrages committed by our army are simply heart-rending. A wholesale vengeance is being taken without distinction of friend and foe. As regards the looting, we have indeed surpassed Nadir Shah!"13General Outram was of opinion that Delhi should be burnt! 
The English army, both European and Indian, engaged at the siege of Delhi, was about ten thousand men. Of those, about four thousand fell on the field, killed and wounded. Such a terrible death-roll is not found even in a struggle like the Crimean war! Though it is impossible to form a reliable estimate of the losses of the Revolutionaries from English accounts, they must have been five to six thousand.14 
In this manner this historical town, inspired by the noble sentiments of Swadharma and Swaraj, fought with a powerful enemy like the English for a hundred and thirty-four days and nights. On the whole, the fight was one befitting a high and exalted principle! From the day on which Delhi threw away the Feringhi flag from her walls and proclaimed the establishment of Swaraj, from the day on which Delhi smashed the chains of slavery and established freedom, from the day on which Delhi first pronounced the formula of unity for 
the vast and extended continent of Hindusthan under a national banner, from that day onward, to the day on which English swords drank Swadeshi blood in the palace of Bahadur Shah, this town had done not a few deeds of noble and unselfish heroism befitting the holy was of freedom! Without a leader, without good organisation, having to fight a well-trained 
13 Life of Lawrence, Vol. II, page 262. 
14 Rotton says : "The casualties of the mutineers were often manifested beyond all due 
bounds." - Page 175. 
enemy like the English, and having to oppose Swadeshi swords no less brave, - why, braver than the Feringhi ones – ready to pronounce upon their compatriots – inspite of all these disadvantages, the Revolutionaries fought a splendid fight. But disunion and want of organisation – the result of the lack of a great leader filled their camp and greatly handicapped them. Despite all these enormous difficulties, the Sepoys at Delhi fought like real national and religious martyrs. Their virtues, and even their faults, will be looked upon with reverence by future generations! “The elephant breaking his tusk, in trying to smash a mountain, is noble!” Throughout all the faults and all the virtues lurks constantly the fire of the love of Swadharma and Swaraj and freedom and sacrifice for a noble principle. And so, both these are living sermons on moral heroism! 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-V 
LUCKNOW 
ON the day on which the Revolutionaries were successful in the battle of Chinhat, the English power in Oudh came to an end and the revolt had openly assumed the form of a national Revolution. The Sepoys, princes, and people began by establishing a ruler liked by them on the vacant throne of Lucknow. The anarchy which raged everywhere for the space of a week after the battle of Chinhat had to be first suppressed before preparations for war could be made. Therefore, the Revolutionaries set themselves to the task of administration at Lucknow, though the week's interval gave an opportunity to the English of fortifying their defences. The late Nabob of Lucknow, Wajid Ali Shah, being a prisoner of the English at Calcutta, they unanimously elected and placed on the throne his son, Prince Birjis Kadir. This Birjis Kadar being a minor, the regency of the kingdom of Oudh was given in the hands of his mother, Queen Hazrat Mahal. As in the palace of Delhi, on account of the extreme old age of Emperor Bahadur Shah, the affairs of state were looked after by Begum Zinat Mahal in the Emperor's name, so in the palace at Lucknow, the Nabob being a minor, the Government depended on his mother, Begum Hazrat Mahal. This Begum of Oudh, thought not quite another Lakshmi Bai, was undoubtedly a great organiser, full of love of liberty and the spirit of daring. She had perfect confidence in an Omrah (nobleman) of the court, called Mahbub Khan. She appointed various officers to the judicial, revenue, police, and military departments. These officers selected were such as were loved and honoured by the representatives of the Sepoys, by Mahbub Khan and other leaving Sirdars, and also by the large numbers of the people who hurried from all parts of Oudh to Lucknow to join in the great War of Independence. Every day, a Durbar was held to discuss political affairs, and there, the Begum Sahiba exercised authority in the name of the Nabob. The news that Oudh 
was free and that not a trace of English rule remained there was sent to the Emperor of Delhi, under the Begum's seal, along with valuable presents. Letters were sent to all the neighbouring Zemindars and vassal Rajas to come to Lucknow with armed followers. From the appointment of the various civil officers, from the good order in all the departments of Government, from the daily Durbars, and other signs, it was apparent that the revolt had ended and constructive government had begun. But, unfortunately, the Revolutionaries did not show as much zeal in obeying the officers appointed as they showed in participating in their appointment. In all Revolutions this common blunder is committed, and this sows the seeds of destruction of the Revolution in the very beginning. Every Revolution is started by cutting down the laws of existing authority by the sword. But when once the habit is formed of mowing down by the sword the unjust laws of unconstitutional authority, then in the heat of the moment, the vicious habit develops of setting at nought all laws at will. The sword used for destroying wicked and cruel laws tends to destroy all law. The heroes, who start out for overthrowing foreign rule, soon get into the habit of overthrowing all rule. In the excitement of breaking the bonds of foreign rule, they begin to dislike all bonds, even those of just and normal rule. And in this way, Revolution ends in Anarchy, virtue in vice, and what ought to be a great benefit ends in loss. The destruction of individuals, of society, and of kingdoms is caused as much by anarchy as by foreign rule, as much by the absence of any bond as by the presence of cruel bonds. If any Revolution forgets this sociological truth, it generally kills itself in the end. Just as a man who begins to take wine as a cure for some distemper does not get rig of the habit of drinking wine even after he is cured; similarly, the habit of breaking bonds, in order to remove bad rule, persists even after its work is done and makes men disorderly and anarchical. That Revolution which destroys injustice and oppression is holy. But when a Revolution roots out one kind of injustice and oppressions but plants, at the same moment, the seeds of another kind, it becomes at once unholy and the seeds of destruction accompanying that sin soon put an end to its life. 
Therefore, those who want to take the wine of Revolution to cure the disease of foreign slavery must be on their guar not to get addicted to the vicious habit. The mind must be trained from the beginning to honour one's own rule as much as to hate foreign rule. In wiping out foreign misrule, care must be taken to discourage, by all possible means, internal disorder. In smiting down foreign rule and foreign authority, one's own rule and authority should be be worshiped as sacred. The moment the foreign power is destroyed, in order to guard the country from the evils of anarchy, a constitution liked by the majority of the people should be at once established and that constitution should be obeyed with reverence by all. The orders of all officers thus appointed must be implicitly carried out, discipline must be observed, individual caprice must give way to devotion to the principle of the common good and, if any change in this constitution is thought desirable and just it must be attempted only by means of the voice of the majority. In short, the rule should be Revolution outside and Constitution within, chaos outside and cosmos within, sword outside and law within. 
These elementary principles of all constitutions so necessary for the success of Revolutions were fairly well observed in the first half of the Rising. Immediately after the Revolution began, attention was given to organise administration with all possible speed at Delhi, Lucknow, Cawnpore, and other cities. In all these big towns, no imposter set himself up with the desire of individual aggrandisement. The undoubted hereditary and popular rulers were set up on the various thrones. These rulers did not even evince any desire to take advantage of the Revolution to further their own selfish ends and increase their power. Nay, more; written documents are published which prove that they were ready to relinquish all their rights if their persons were in the way of the country's independence.15 Thus, in 1857, the first part of constructive administration was successfully achieved 
15 See page 273, above. 
in a spirit of adorable nobility. But, in this organisation, the important and major section being composed of common sepoys, they began to feel all bonds unbearable when they had once removed the shackles of foreign rule. And, at the time of the crisis, all discipline became lax. Therefore, even those officers, whom they appointed at the first impulse of the ideal of Swaraj, they later on insulted, disobeyed, and mocked. And thus, the Revolution tended to end in anarchy. Under these circumstances, had there arisen a hero who, by his individual prowess and the might of his all- conquering sword, could have won the hearts or awe of those followers who, incapable of being unified by an abstract ideal, could have still been bound together by a common hero-worship, the Revolution might have been crowned with success. But, in the absence of such a hero on the one side and the inherant tendency of an uncontrolled Revolution to lapse into anarchy on the other, there were more rabble than disciplined soldiers in the army of the kingdon of Oudh. The martyrs, by their undaunted, unconquered, and unconquerable determination to do and die, kept the field busin for three years! In the camp at Lucknow, the men of the first kind were much more numerous than those of the second, and the orders of several officers appointed by Begum Hazrat Mahal were never strictly obeyed. And the Sepoys became impudent, oppressive, disorderly, and self-willed. 
But still some brave heroic spirit who were staying among them inspired the Sepoys with their bravery, noble ideas, and natural excellence of spirit. And as these valiant men insisted, it was resolved to make the first great attack on the besieged Residency on the 20th of July. 
On the morning of the 20th of July, the Revolutionary artillery which had been very actgive so long, suddenly stopped firing. About eight o'clock, the Revolutionary party laid some mines under the Residency walls and filled them with dynamite. The mines were blown up and the Sepoy ranks rushed forth after the explosion. At the same time, the guns again began a terrible fire on the English. The Revolutionary army fell upon the English from different directions – toward the Redan, on the house of Innes, on the Cawnpore Battery. The part of the army which attacked the Cawnpore battery made a desperate rush on the English guns. Again and again, they rushed against the guns. Their heroic leader, fluttering the flag of Swaraj in his hand, jumbed into the ditch and called upon the others to follow, shouting, “Chalo, Bahadur! Chalo!” (Come, brave men, come!) He crossed the ditch and began to plant the Revolutionary flat on English guns!16 But this brave soldier was soon shot down by an English bullet. Instead of thousands rushing forth over his dead body at this time and avenging the death of the martyr the crowd of camp followers retreated instead of advancing. But, bravo! You ladder-men! You did not imitate the cowardly camp-followers but rushed forth like real Sepoys. Plant the ladders in the ditch and mount up quickly in spite of the first of the English! Thew first batch has fallen - but let the next one come. But are the others who dare risk it? This is the difference between the English army and the Revolutionaries! The English never allowed the blood of their comrades to be shed in vain; if one falls, ten rush forward in his place. We do not care where those who fled behing will go do; but, you heroes, you martyrs, you have reached Heaven! Those who took the flag of Swaraj in their own hands; in order that it might not be polluted by the touch of cowardly living corpses, those who went up to put that flat on the enemy's fire-spitting guns, by their glorious, holy blood - that flag will be eternally pure and shine with a divine splendour! The flag of Swaraj looks its best only in such wounded and bleeding arms! One whose wrists are not bespattered with blood should not touch and pollute the holy flag of independence! 
After this first assault was repulsed, the Revolutionaries had, daily, small skirmishes with the English. They did their best in dynamiting the houses in the Residency. From above, the fire of terrible guns, and from below, dynamite explosions! No Englishman was sure when the ground beneath his feet would burst and swallow him. According to Brigadier Innes's calculation, the Revolutionaries dynamited the Residency thirty- 
16 Gubbins’s Mutinies, page 218 
seven times! The Revolutionary guns were, also, constantly active. The Sepoys would send splendidly aimed shots against the English and the English would reply to them. There were death-dealing fights between bands of scouts which set out at night to get secret information from the opposite camps. Often, the secret whisperings of a group of men either within or without the walls were heard by the other party and nullified their plans. The Revolutionaries amused themselves often by aiming a ball exactly at the English flag and destroying it. And the English, also, unfailingly hauled up a new one at the Residency as soon as night fell. At such ghastly jokes, the battlefield of Lucknow would open her terrible jaws and smile a deathly smile! Every night the messengers of the Revolutionaries would go hiding near a part of the fort occupied by the Sikhs or other Indians and ask them, “Why do you play the traitor (Nimak haram) with the nation and thrust the sword of the Feringhis into the bodies of your own brethren?” If any night these questions became persistent, the “loyal” Sikhs, to have some fun, would ask them to come near in order to converse better and, as soon as they came, would make an Englishman who had hitherto kept himself concealed stand up before them! Seeing such treachery, the Revolutionaries would return cursing their baseness. Of all the splendid and unring shots among the Revolutionaries, an African eunuch who had been in the service of the late Nabob spread terror in the English Residency. He was nicknamed "Othello" by the English. 
About this time Major Banks who had taken charge of the office of chief commissioner of Oudh, after the death of Sir Henry Lawrence, also fell dead by the bullet of a Revolutionary. This was the second English chief commissioner killed duringthe siege! But on account of the fixed, regular, and orderly organisation of the English army, even during the uncertain terrors of a siege, the death of a commander had no more effect than the death of a common soldier as regards the efficiency of the army. When the second commissioner fell, Brigadier Inglis took charge as commissioner, and the work of defence went on as before. At this time, however, the 
losses, deaths, the removal of leaders, the scarcity of food, and the activity of the Revolutionaries had made the English at Lucknow fairly desperate, though not altogether hopeless. 
Just then Angad returned from Cawnpore! This Angad was an Indian formerly employed in the English army and now a pensioner. Since the siege of Lucknow, it had become impossible for any white messenger to go out and return with information. His white skin, his yellowish hair, and his blue eyes could never escape the swords of the Revolutionaries. Therefore, it became necessary to employ brown men on the English messages, and thus, many "loyal" brown messengers had been sent out from Lucknow. But, out of all these, only Angad returned alive! He did not bring any letter or anything else suspicious with him for fear of the Revolutionaries, but he gave commander Inglis the assurance that he had himself seen the English army set out from Cawnpore for the relief of Lucknow. Encouraged by this news, the English told Angad to go back and get a written reply. Angad left Lucknow on the 22nd and returned at eleven o'clock on the night of the 25th. With him was Havelock's letter, "Havelock is coming with an army sufficient for all odds. Lucknow will be relieved in five or six days." In order to furnish Havelock, who was coming to releive them, with all information, the English gave military plans and maps to Angad and told him to go to Havelock again. That marvellous scout again went to Havelock's camp and delivered to him all the military maps of Lucknow. Now, all English eyes were turned towards the direction from which they expected Havelock's victorious flag to march over the dead bodies of the Revolutionaries. They even heard some distant sounds of artillery-fire. Could they be Havelock's guns? 
The English had not long been fondly hoping that Havelock was coming to help them when they discovered that it meant a second assault from the Revolutionary side! The revolutionaries at first opened fire on the Cawnpore battery, Johannes' House, Begum Kothi, and other places. On that day, the Revolutionary dynamite did splendid work. There was a 
tremendously big breach in the English wall, enough for a whole regiment to march in in good order. But where was the regiment that would go in? If the English had effected such a breacnh in the enemy's wall, they would have captured the place in half an hour. Some heroes among the Revolutionaries fought bravely till two in the afternoon. The Indians on the English side, however, excelled in bravery, discipline, and contempt of death! What a misfortune! This bravery in treachery and this cowardice in patriotism! What a contrast! Run up, some one, to remove this stain! It is now five and the attack is almost repulsed, but run up, someone, though not for immediate victory at least for ever-lasting glory! Captain Saunders, beware! The furious march of heroes devoted to principle is coming! It is come; this band of infuriated heroes are marching straight on - they are obstructed by the English wall but they are trying bodily to push it away. The English, at this crisis, left their guns and took up their bayonets. Hail, Freedom! Some snatched away the bayonets with their own hands and at last, fallen a prey to an English bullet! But they have saved the disgrace of their country on the field and exhibited bravery admired even by enemies. The fight was such that the English themselves took photographs of these heroes who struggled to wrest away English bayonets from the walls and fought with the frenzy of lions till death! 
On the 18th of August, the Revolutionaries made another attack on the English. On this day, as usual, a breach was first made by dynamite and, then, the Revolutionaries rushed forth. Malleson writes :- "One of their officers, a very gallant fellow, sprang at once to the top of the breach and, waving his sword, called on his men to follow. Before, however, his summons was responded to, a bullet had laid him low. His place was instantly occupied by another, but he was as instantly killed. Etc., etc." 
The bravery of the three men, as described even by Feringhis, was a match to Nicholson's bravery at Delhi. But it went in vain on account of the timidity of their followers. Instead of pushing forth with redoubled 
vigour at the death of the three, the thousands behind them thought it prudent to retire. From this one event, what a lesson ought to be learnt? 
These frequent attacks were not all. Before the terrible daily fire of artillery and guns, the English found it unbearable to hold out much longer in spite of the excellent assistance of the "loyal" Indians. Just then, Angad again returned to Lucknow! As the English commander was about to ask him, in eager joy, how far Havelock had marched according to his promise, the scout delivered to him Havelock's letter, "I cannot come towards Lucknow for at least twenty-five days to come"! Nothing is more unbearable than despair following hope. Not only dying patients and emaciated women but soldiers and officers became extremely dispirited, sad, and frightened. A death-like shadow came over the whole English force. Food became dear and all were ordered to live on half-rations! Why this delay? Why is a warrior like Havelock not coming to such an important work as the relief of Lucknow? 
Without they delay of a moment, Havelock had left Cawnpore and crossed the Ganges as far back as the 29th of July, in order to save his comrades at Lucknow. He had a thousand and five hundred men and thirteen guns and had written a letter to assurance to them, promising to relieve them without fail within five or six days. But as soon as he crossed the Ganges and stepped into Oudh, the imaginary ease of the task began to melt away like a cloud! Every inch of the way through Oudh had risen in revolt! Every Zemindar had collected a few hundred men under him and had begun the fight for independence. Every village flew the national Revolutionary flag. Seeing this terrible state of affairs, Havelock became very much dejected in mind. He was dejected but he did not despair. He marched on. The Revolutionaries encountered him first at Onao but flew away soon. After this skirmish at Onao, Havelock gave his soldiers only time for eating and, after that, the march continued. At Bashiratganj, a second skirmish took place with a similar result, Havelock's army fought two such skirmishes on the 29th and got the better of the Revolutionaries in both. 
But, was this a real victory? In one day, the handful of his army lost one sixth of its number. And the Revolutionaries were not in the least broken up. Nay, more; it is doubtful whether the Revolutionaries were really defeated and chased away or they had hit upon the new plan of harassing the enemy considerably without suffering any losses themselves! And just then the news had come that the Danapur sepoys had also joined the Revolution. This threatening state of affairs compelled Havelock to stop his forward march on the 30th and retire back to Mangalwar. 
Hearing that Havelock's army had left Cawnpore, Nana Sahib Peshwa again resumed operations round about Cawnpore. While Havelock left Cawnpore and crossed the Ganges to enter Outh, Nana Sahib left Oudh and was crossing the same river to re-enter Cawnpore! Not to be caught in this trap of Nana Sahib, Havelock had to remain encamped at Mangalwar till the 4th of August. Instead of Havelock driving the Revolutionaries within a week to the banks of the Gotami, Nana Sahib had made Havelock stick to the Ganges. Just then the Revolutionaries in his front came up again to Bashiratganj. Irritated by the persistent harassing, Havelock became desperate and started towards Lucknow with his troops. At Bashiratganj he again gave battle to the Revolutionaries and drove them away. But here, also, the question was whether it was a victory or a defeat. For, in this fight, havelock lost three hundred men and his troops were so fatigued that, instead of advancing towards Lucknow, he began to retire on the Ganges. On that day, out of the one thousand and five hundred men that started with him, there remained only eight hundred and fifty! 
Hearing that Havelock had again retreated to Mangalwar on the 5th of August, the Revolutionaries once more captured Bashiratganj and encamped there. In this army of the Revolutionaries, the greater number were well-to-do Zemindars. "All the men killed yesterday were Zemindars."17 For the sake of their country, for the sake of independence 
17 Kaye and Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, p. 340. 
and Swaraj, those rich and happy men had discarded their soft beds and had resolved to go to the battle-field and risk all its dangers and risks. Seeing this enthusiasm on their part, the English historian Innes says: “At least, the struggle of the Oudhians must be characterised as a war of independence.” The Revolutionary army was constantly hovering round Havelock’s Mangalwar, the Revolutionaries, as we said before, again encamped at Bashiratganj. Therefore, on the 11th of August, Havelock pushed forward to Bashiratganj for the third time – and for the third time there was a fight and the Revolutionaries fled away; but Havelock asked himself, for the third time, “Is this victory or defeat?” 
It was neither a victory nor a defeat. Therefore, instead of advancing, Havelock fell back on Mangalwar. In the meanwhile, Nana’s plans were becoming ripe. The Revolutionaries of Sagar and of Gwalior and bands of volunteers came and joined him. Taking them with him, Nana marched to Bithoor and threatened to attack Cawnpore. General Neill had not enough troops to march against him and so sent word to Havelock of his critical position. It was now impossible to think of proceeding to Lucknow. Therefore, on the 12th of August, Havelock had to recross the Ganges and go back to Cawnpore! When the English bands sounded the retreat, everywhere there were joyful shouts of acclamation as if the victorious drums of independence was being beaten! You faithful Zemindars, you have served your country well in thus shedding your blood and driving away the foreign fow, and wanted to re-enter Oudh, away on the other side of the Ganges! Innes writes : "This retirement from Oudh produced a result which he had, doubtless, never contemplated. The Talukdars openly construed it as the British evacuation of the province and now formally recognised the Durbar at Lucknow as the de facto government; and, though they refrained from supporting it by their own presence they obeyed its orders which they 
had hitherto disregarded, and sent to the scene of warfare the contingents which they had been called upon to provide."18 
The victory of the Revolutionaries was not a direct but an indirect one. If, in the above four or five skirmishes fought by Havelock, he had been defeated and driven away to Cawnpore, a greater self-confidence would have been seen in the Revolutionary ranks than was to be seen now by simply forcing him to retire by harassing his rear. And, proportionately, the English forces would have been more demoralised. The English army perceived that the retreat to Cawnpore was due not to lack of bravery but to lack of numbers and, though baulked of its fruits, its vigour, self- confidence, and pride were not a whit diminished by this indirect defeat. And, therefore, Havelock encamped at Cawnpore with the full confidence that he would start again for Lucknow as soon as he got reinforcements. 
At this time, there was a serious quarrel between Havelock and Neill on account of personal jealousy. This is clearly seen in the following letter written by Havelock to Neill: “I wrote to you confidentially on the state of affairs. You send me back a letter of censure of my measures, reproof, and advice for the future. I do not want and will not receive any of them from an officer under my command, be his experience what it may. Understand this distinctly, and that a consideration of the obstruction that would arise to the public service at this moment along prevents me from taking the stronger step of keeping you under arrest. You now stand warned. Attempt no further dictation.”19 In this letter, one sentence is an excellent indication of the sense of duty towards the nation, ingrained in the bones of all Englishmen. Even in the height of passion, Havelock says that "consideration of the obstruction that would arise to the public service alone" prevented him from then and there avenging his personal insult! In trhis dispute between the two generals Neill and Havelock at this critical 
18 The Sepoy Revolt, page 174. 
19 Quoted by Malleson, Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, p. 337, note. 
time, not only did both of them behave calmly in order that their national enemy might not take advantage of this division, but both helped each other, as far as possible, for their common end. In that society where, individualism is held in check by regard for public advantage, in that society alone can wealth and intellect, and fame and independence last long. 
The first news that Havelock received when he came to Cawnpore was that Nana Sahib's army had re-occupied the town of Brahmavarta. Seeing that the Revolutionaries had thus advanced again close to the Cawnpore army, Havelock marched against them at once. On this day, at the battle of Brahmavarta, when the English came up fighting within twenty yards of the Revolutionary ranks, the 42nd regiment on the Revolutionary side began to use their bayonets. The English so long used to think that, when all other means failed, bayonets would surely frighten away the Revolutionaries. But to-day, the brave heroes of freedom, themselves, began to attack with bayonets. At the same time, the Revolutionary cavalry fell upon the English rear and carried off their provisions. Thus the English army was attacked both in front and the rear by the gallant Revolutionaries. Even the English commander saw that the Revolutionaries were gradually becoming more and more valiant. But this bravery and heroism was not properly moulded by discipline as it was on the English side and, even after all this valour, the Revolutionaries were defeated and had to retire. When Havelock retired to Cawnpore on the 17th of August after inflicting this defeat on the Revolutionaries, he perceived that the whole army of Nana Sahib was not at Brahmavarta but that he had a vast and fully equipped force in the town of Kalpi, on the banks of the Jumna. Harassed from Kalpi, harassed from Brahmavarta, harassed from Oudh, harassed on both sides of the Ganges! Thus harassed on all sides, the “victorious” Havelock wrote to Calcutta: “We are in a terrible fix. If new reinforcements do not arrive, the British army cannot escape the fate of abandoning Lucknow and retreating to Allahabad.” Havelock awaited a reply to this appeal, from Calcutta. He expected to receive reinforcements according to his request and hoped that 
he would crown all his victories and defeats by the relief of Lucknow. But, suddenly, he got an order that the command of the army to be sent to Lucknow was taken from him and given to Sir James Outram! English punishment is so severe! Even though victorious, Neill was a little late in going to Cawnpore; so, the command was taken from him and given to Havelock. And, though victorious, Havelock was inevitably late in going to Lucknow; so even an able general like him was removed and Sir James Outram was made the commander! At this news, Havelock was extremely mortified. The glory for which he strove day and night, with his life in his hands, the glory of relieving Lucknow, would now fall into other hands. This insult grieved him very much. Still, Malleson writes, "It is one of the glories of our countrymen that, however actually they may feel a disappointment of this nature, it never affects their public conduct. It is this recognition of, and this devotion to, duty, that stamp the Englishman. He subordinates to it all private feelings. He may be keenly sensible of the injustice perpetrated towards himself, but above himself is always his country. He may have his own views as to how that country may best be served; but, when the Government which represents it has otherand different views, he feels bound to devote all his energies to make possible the success of the orders of the Government. Thus acted Neill. And, now, thus also acted Havelock. Superseded, as he regarded himself to be, he was as active, as daring, as devoted, as when he ruled as the unfettered commander of an independent force."20 
While Havelock was working day and night for the victory which was to belong to another, Sir James Outram arrived at Cawnpore on the 15th of September. After the chief command was transferred from Havelock to Sir James Outram, the first order that Outram issued was to the following effect: “He who so bravely has been keeping up the struggle for the raising 
20 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, page 346. of the siege of Lucknow, he alone deserves the honour of accomplishing that task. For this reason, I have handed over all my authority as a commander to the brave Havelock, till the siege of Lucknow be raised, and have enlisted myself as a simple volunteer in the ranks.” 
What a moral education this first noble order of the commander must have been to the English army! How the individual must have been merged in the nation! With the first order, Outram gave the chief command to Havelock and showed unparalleled patriotism, generosity, and unselfishness. 
Inspired by the moral lesson of this piece of heroic nobility, and reinforced by fresh English troops from Calcutta under officers like Eyre, Outram, and Cooper, the Cawnpore army, with redoubled vigour, again started to cross the Ganges on the 20th of September to march to the relief of Lucknow. The impatient Havelock of July 25th who started to "relieve Lucknow in five or six days," the Havelock of August 12th unfortunate in having to retreat to Cawnpore and who found it difficult to hold out at all in Oudh, and the resolute and hopeful Havelock of 20th of September! How different are these three pictures of Havelock? He had, now, two thousand and five hundred English troops, and the whole army, including the Sikhs, numbered about three thousand two hundred and fifty. Select cavalry, excellent artillery, officers like Neill, Eyre, and Outram were with him. Now, he did not pay any heed to the Oudh Revolutionaries. Every Zemindar who cam,e to the field to save his country from the polluting touch of the Feringhi was killed. Every proud village that stood up to fight, unable to bear a sight of Feringhi horsemen galloping in the mother-country, was burnt to ashes! Every road, every field, every river on the way was reddened with Swadeshi blood! Thus, the powerful English army began to push its way into Oudh with violence. Fighting skirmish after skirmish and routing the ill-trained Revolutionaries, Havelock arrived at Alarm Bagh on the 23rd of September. A Revolutionary force was encamped there. The two forces met. The whole day the terrible battle was raging near Alam Bagh. The 
enemy captured five of the guns of the Revolutionaries, one of which the Revolutionaries recaptured. Both sides determined to spend the night on the field. But when the army of the enemy began to rest at night in the muddy and swampy ground, the Revolutionaries forswore all rest and started the fight again. That, night rain was falling in showers. But the waves of enthusiasm in the English army were stronger even than the showers of rain, for the electrifying news of the fall of Delhi had reached them that night! 
At last, the critical day of the 25th dawned. Seeing that Havelock's army, avoiding the regular roads leading to Lucknow city was marching to the Residency by an odd road, the Revolutionaries opened a terrible fire. Bearing this artillery-fire bravely, the English came up from Alam Bagh right up to the bridge at Char Bagh. To cross this bridge was to enter Lucknow, and, therefore, an obstinate fight began on this most strategic point. Captain Maude directed a heavy fire for half an hour on that bridge, but neither the bridge was emptied nor were the guns on it silenced. Nay more, the English had lost already twenty-one killed near the Yellow House and more on the bridge. Was the whole English army to be checked by this one defiant bridge? So, Maude said to Havelock's young son standing near by, "Young hero, find out some remedy for this!" At this, young Havelock came to Neill and told him that the Revolutionaries could not be driven away by the artillery, and requested him to give the order to lead an assault on that bridge. But General Neill said that he could not give such an order without consulting Havelock. What was to be done next? Young Havelock at once found out the answer to this question. He spurred his horse and galloped a little in the direction where the general-in-chief, Havelock, was and, pretending to have seen him, returned to Neill. He humbly saluted Neill and said: "The commander-in-chief has ordered the assault on the bridge." Hearing this, the general gave the order to assault. Young Havelock himself rushed to the bridge with the first batch of twenty- five Englishmen. The fire was terrible. In one or two minutes, which of the twenty-five remained alive? And the young Havelock himself - beware! 
beware - a brave and fearless hero has jumped upon the bridge and is taking aim straight at you! The brave Sepoy came up to within ten yards of young Havelock, stood there coolly before all the English host and quietly aimed at Havelock; the bullet went - but there was a difference of only half an inch! Instead of entering the head, it entered Havelock's helmet. Still the dauntless Sepoy stood there calmly while several English guns were aimed at him and began loading his gun again! At last, you have been shot by Havelock, but bravo! You have died killing like a hero in this battle for independence! In a few moments, the vast English army rushed upon the bridge which began to shake with their weight. The Revolutionaries had to retire and the English advanced. The bridge fell; the first road to Lucknow fell; then, the second fell; then, the third - the English army pushed onward, victorious. Every few steps, swords would clash with swords and guns with guns. When a copious lake of blood accumulated there, the living Battle would advance again. In the evening, Outram said that the night should be spent outside. But no, no! How could the brave Havelock bear even to hear the name of rest? To whom countrymen of theirs, crushed in the very jaws of death in that Residency, one night would be like an age. Therefore, Havelock advanced - Neill advanced. The English army missed the road fixed upon and came nearer and nearer into the line of fire of the Revolutionaries - still Neill advanced. When he entered the great arch of Khas Bazaar, he saw that the English artillery had slacked a little behind. Therefore, he drew up his horse and turned his head to look back. Now is the time! This is the time for the country's revenge! O you Revolutionary hero on the arch, even if you lose your life, you must make use of this opportunity. In a moment, a Sepoy who was lying in weit on the arch took aim and lodged a bullet straight into the very neck of General Neill and he dropped down dead! In the whole English army, it was very difficult to find another man so brave and so cruel, so insolent and so undaunted, so patient and so heartless, by the good luck and ill-luck of humanity. 
But it is the peculiarity of the English army that the continuance of its work does not depend upon an individual - even an uncommon general like Neill. Neill's death did not create the slightese confusion; the English army continued its march to the Residency all the same. In that Khas Bazaar where Neill fell with his neck broken, even if there had flowed an ocean of English blood, the English army would have marched in the same manner. When they went through the bazaars, they heard the joyous hurrahs from the Residency. They also shouted "Hurrah" in reply. Havelock had relieved his compatriots from the very jaws of Death! That scene can best be described in the pen of Captain Wilson who was present there. "In spite of deaths that were diminishing their ranks at every step, the white army approached the Residency, and at their sight all fear and doubt vanished away from the besieged garrison. They showered their congratulations and blessings on the advancing deliverers, the sick and the wounded crept out of the hsopitals, and continuous cheers and welcomes pealed forth in succession. Very soon the deliverers met the delivered. The occasion defies description. Those who had heard of the death of their husbands found themselves in the arms of their living husbands, to the unbounded joy of both. And those who were looking forward to the cherished embrace of their beloved ones learned for the first time that death had left no hope of seeing them any longer!" 
In the Residency of Lucknow, fighting without intermission for eighty-seven days, seven hundred men had fallen. About five hundred Europeans and four hundred Indians were alive, wounded as well as whole. And in the army of Havelock, which set out for their relief, seven hundred twenty-two men were killed before the Residency was reached! It was at the cost of so many brave men's lives that the victory of Lucknow was achieved. 
But you cruel Despair! You are still as invincible as ever! Havelock has harassed the Revolutionaries so much but you still do not leave him! For, when he entered the Residency he had thought that, after all the victories, all the bloodshed, all the fighting, he had, at last, relieved the English power from the grip of the Revolutionaries. But now, his delusion is 
being dispelled and he asks himself, after reaching the Lucknow Residency, the same question as he did when he was on the banks of the Ganges, "What I brought to the Residency - is it complete relief or more help?" Instead of the siege being raised by Havelock's coming to the Residency, the Revolutionaries now besieged the old army as well as the new! And therefore, everyone began to ask, "What has Havelock brought us, relief or mere help?" It was only help! This army, which the two great English generals, Havelock and Outram, brought, after fighting many battles, to relieve the English at Lucknow from the grip of the Pandays, instead of raising the siege, went in and was besieged itself along with the other. The English hoped that the army of the Pandays would disperse as soon as Havelock's army entered the Residency. All India soon saw that these hopes were completely dashed to the ground. Instead of giving up Lucknow or opening negotiations for peace with the English, the Panday host, infuriated by the progress of the War of Independence, took up its former position round the Residency as soon as Havelock entered it. While entering the Residency, one part of the English army had been left behind at Alam Bagh. This part was not allowed a chance to join the main army. And, before the pools of blood accumulated in the streets in the course of the day's fight had dried up, the freedom-loving city of Lucknow, discardingthe discouragement and despair caused by their defeat and the victory of the English, again besieged and bottled up the English power in Oudh. 
It was not only the English army at Lucknow that was placed in a fix by this firm and determined stand of the Pandays in the War of Independence. The whole English army from Peshawar up to Aligarh had to suffer a severe strain. All the troops had been despatched under the command of Havelock to fall upon Lucknow; and when, in spite of the help of these troops, not only the besieged army in the Residency was not set free but the army was beleaguered there, then, the English power in the provinces below Lucknow became considerably enfeebles. Though just then, 
Delhi had fallen and the English army there was free, it had enough work on its hands in 'restoring order' in the provinces around Delhi. In these circumstances, the English Commander-in-Chief left the armies at Lucknow and Alam Bagh to fight it out themselves for the present with the Revolutionaries, and began to attend to the lightening of the strain on the British power as the more important task. 
The new English Commander-in-Chief, Sir Colin Campbell, had arrived at Calcutta on the 13 th of August. From that day till the 27th of October, he has straining every nerve to prepare for the vast campaign to reconquer Hindusthan from the hands of the Revolutionaries. He portioned out the English army as it arrived from Madras, Ceylon, and China. He cast new guns in the Cassim Bazaar arsenal. He had excellent arrangements as far as possible for arms and ammunition, provision, cloths, and transport. He spent two months in these preparations for the next great campaign when the news arrived that Havelock and Outram were still shut up in the Residency at Lucknow. Therefore, with the resolve to deal personally with the obstinate town of Lucknow which fell but rose again, he set out from Calcutta on the 27th of October. 
About the same time, a naval brigade had been formed under Colonel Powell and Captail William Peel and sent up the river to Allahabad. From Calcutta right up to Allahabad and Cawnpore, near all the big roads, small bands of Revolutionaries were constantly harassing the English army. If these bands had been found together, the English could have possibly attacked them all; but the Panday forces, trained in the school of Kumar Singh, hovered round the English army, always avoided battle, never gave the English any indication of their existence except when attacking them and, by these guerilla tactics, had created consternation in the English camp in the whole province. While trying to drive away such a band from the Kajva river, the colonel of the naval brigade was killed. On the day on which the Panday sword drank the blood of Powell, the Commander-in- Chief arrived at Cawnpore. The Commander-in-Chief had himself had a 
terrible experience as to how the Revolutionary bands harassed the armies on their march. 
Sir Colin Campbell was driving in a carriage from Allahabad to Cawnpore. Though the English had tremendous difficulties in obtaining transport and the Commander-in-Chief had to sit in a third-class cart, on the same road was marching a detachment of a Revolutionary regiment of infantry mounted on about a dozen elephants. There were, also, twenty-five horsemen accompanying them. Sir Colin was alone. When the driver of the card came near Sher Ghati, he saw the Revolutionary band coming to the same place by another road. Though the Pandays did not pay any attention to the freight on the card, because they had no idea of it, still, the freight itself was considerably anxious! The commander-in-chief going towards Cawnpore toconquer the whole of India saw standing before him, suddenly, the terrible Revolutionary band. He gave up the route and turned back immediately. A word would have done him! A sign from the cartman would have been enough! And the man who could not have been caught even after killing thousands of Englishmen would have been made a prisoner by an ordinary cartman. It was the difference of a moment. Sir Colin would have been arrested and taken before Kumar Singh or sent at once before the Angel of Death! 
After escaping from this danger, Sir Colin arrived at Cawnpore on the 3rd of November. As large a force as possible had already been assembled there under Brigadier Grant. The naval brigade mentioned before also arrived there along with the new English troops. Greathed also, with the Delhi army, came there having routed the Revolutionaries of the province of Delhi on the way. After the fall of Delhi, the bravery which Greathed exhibited in restoring "peace" in the province around Delhi absolutely surpassed that of Neill at Allahabad. It is unparalleled. Since the beginning of the Revolution, up till November, this province was in the hands of the Revolutionaries. But the people in the province were so little harassed that the English themselves write: "The people not only cultivated but in many 
districts as extensively as ever. In fact, beyond supplying their necessity, the rebels did not venture to assume the character of tyrants of the country."21 The Pandays had treated this province as was proper for volunteers fighting for the freedom of their country - and the British who had set out to crush its spirit of independence, destroyed it completely as befitted the proclaimers of slavery! And, all this, to restore peace! Burning village after village, hanging on the gallows any robust man found on the way, and killing the village inhabitants en route with more recklessness than if they were wild birds, Greathed's army came from Delhi to Cawnpore! That army and the naval brigade effected a junction with the other white troops there, and Brigadier Grant began to go down the Ganges. O Ganges! How many English armies have come to thy shores to proceed to relieve Lucknow! And O you proud Ayodhya, are you not now at least going to release the English army from the dungeons of Lucknow when this new force has come to terrorise you? Brigadier Grant had about five thousand English troops besides hundreds of camels, etc. He had also taken with him plenty of provisions for the Lucknow army. When the news came that this army of Grant had fought its way up to Alam Bagh, Sir Colin Campbell left Cawnpore and crossed the Ganges. To guard his rear, he left a select English and Sikh army with a number of guns at Cawnpore under the command of Wyndham who had won fame in several European wars. Sir Colin joined the chief army at Alam Bagh on the 9th of November. He reviewed the Alam Bagh forces and planned a combined attack by the various regiments. He now gave the order to make an assault on Lucknow on the 14th of November. Before this, a daring Englishman, called Cavenagh, had entered the Residency in company with an Indian at night, evading the sepoy guards by blackening his face and putting on Indian garb. He was sent there to get information about the state of defences of the Residency and to discuss plans about the coming attack. 
21 Narrative of the Indian Mutiny. 
He had before this time delivered the messages of Colin and Outram to each other. In the Residency and in the English camp at Alam Bagh, everyone was waiting anxiously for the 14th of November, Havelock and Outram were to come out of the Residency to attack the Revolutionaries from inside and Sir Colin was to press them on the other side! At this time, in the English camp were to be found most of the eminent generals and warriors that made their name in 1857. Havelock, Outram, Peel (of the naval brigade), Greathed, Hodson of Delhi, Brigadier Hope Grant, Eyre, and the Commander-in-Chief Sir Colin himself - all were there. There were fresh Highlanders, Outram's Europeans anxious to jump into the field from within the besieged fort, "loyal" Panjabee youths, and still more loyal Sikhs, with their swords still bespattered with the blood of the Motherland shed at Delhi! 
Such was the English army that started towards Lucknow on the 14th of November. The whole day was spent in skirmishes between the English and the Revolutionaries. About the evening, the English army had advanced fighting upto Dilkhwush Bagh. Sir Colin decided to spend the night there and encamped in the garden. Though the Revolutionaries led intermittend attacked even that night, the English army did not heed them and spent the night there. Next morning, Sir Colin arrayed all his troops and gave the order to attack Lucknow again on the 16th. Then, the English army advanced like a tidal wave and fell upon Sikandar Bagh. Till it reached this place, it had not met with serious resistance from the Revolutionaries. But whoever was the leader of the Revolutionaries there, he did show some splendid fighting. When the Highlanders, under Ewart, and the Sikhs, under Powell, fell upon Sikandar Bagh yelling fiercely, it seemed as if the undaunted dash of the English force would sweep everything before it. The Sikh Subahdar, Gukul Singh, waved his sword in the air and tried his utmost not to let the Highlanders go before his own fellows. On! Unfortunate Lucknow! With the cruel emulation as to who will drink her blood most, Sikh and Highlander swords began grim work. But the strong boulders of 
Sikandar Bagh were destroyed, the heroes there would not move back at all! For, when some stones of the wall fell, the English troops rushed there like arrows. Who goes first, Sikh or Highlander? Both are trying hard. But, at last, the man who first reached the breach is a Sikh. To reward this traitor's valour, a bullet right in his breast! He fell and immediately Cooper rushed in, and behind him Eward and captain John Lumsden, - and then Sikhs and Highlanders all quickly rushed in. The Sepoys within were staggered for a moment on seeing the whole army entering so quickly. But the hero who led the Revolutionaries that day at Sikandar Bagh was no ordinary leader. He does not think of retreat! 
Victory or Death! Death or Victory!! This cry fits only the months of those who fight for freedom. Cooper is the first man who had rushed into the Bagh; therefore, the Sepoy must try to kill him first. This cannot be done except by the brave sepoy officer of the regiment which revolved at Ludhiana. He looked out for Cooper and ran straight at him. Clang! Clang! Clang of swords! A deep thrust, both simultaneously cut each other and both fell dead! Lumsden began to wave about his sword in the air and shouted, "Come on, men, for the honour of Scotland!" How insolent! For the honour of Scotland! And has Hindusthan no honour? Before any white man came up for the honour of Scotland, a brown hero rushed forth for the honour of Hindusthan - and blood began to gush out of Lumsden's lifeless corpse! While such a terrible hand to hand fight was going on here, the English army broke the wall on another side and rushed in from there also. Now this Bagh had no hope of victory. Then, O Sikandar Bagh, are you going to fight even after victory is gone? Fight on, fight on! Let victory go but do not lose honour, do not lose fame, jump into thebattle as a duty! On every door, on every step, in every quadrangle, sword clashed with sword! Blood was shed everywhere. Malleson says, "The fight for the possession of the enclosure was bloody and desperate, the rebels fighting with all the energy of despair. Nor did the struggle end when our men forced their way inside. Every room, every staircase, every corner of the towers was contested. Quarter was neither given nor asked for; and, when at last the assailands were masters of the place more than two thousand rebel corpses lay heaped around them. It is said that, of all who garrisoned it, only four men escaped, but even the escape of four is doubtful."22 
Oh, you two thousand martyrs that denied fighting for independence in Sikandar Bagh, let this grateful history be dedicated to your memory! The blood of two thousand patriots! This history is dedicted to that blood! Who were you that started to fight thus for the country? What were your names? Who was the brave leader that led you to the fatal battle? The good fortune of relating all this, the good fortune of pronouncing the names of you who sacrificed your bodies in the hope of serving humanity, has not fallen to our lot! Let, then, this history be dedicated to your nameless memory alone! Victory was gone, but you did not allow your fame to be tarnished! Let your blood and bravery purify and adorn the Past and incite and inspire the Future! 
You did not soil your fames, O Heros of Independence, but if your self-sacrifice in Sikandar Bagh had begun at its proper time, victory also would have been yours! Now, the might of your enemy has increased manifold. Thousands of new soldiers have come to fight on their side, their strain has become less after the fall of Delhi, their moral strength has augmented by victory and yours has diminished by defeat. Such a dry and lifeless soil, even the blood of two thousand men will not fertilise. If, however, as soon as the Revolution began, at the first onslaught on the feeble Residency, you had rushed up with the cry of "Victory or Death!" - then, in half an hour's time, the crown of independence would have shone on the forehead of Hindusthan. You died as you should die but the auspicious moment was gone! Time and opportunity were gone. In a war of Revolution, what is lost by a minute, sometimes, cannot be regained in an epoch. A drop 
22 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 132. 
of blood could have given you victory then, but, now, even fountains of blood will given you only fame, but victory is difficult. In the whirlwind of Revolutions, the loss of a single moment spoils the whole plan. One step back means disaster. The momentary hankering after life is sure to bring permanent death to the cause! 
Blood was abundantly shed in other places also than in Sikandar Bagh. Bilkhwush, Alam Bagh, and Shah Najaf were giving a terrible battle to the enemy that day and that night. In the early morning, all the bells of Lucknow city began to peal, drums began to beat, and again the wounded city began to give a fierce battle to the enemy. The fight at Moti Mahal to- day is not a whit less fierce than that at Shah Najaf yesterday. But, in the end, the English got decided the upper hand and the English army was enabled to relieve its compatriots so long shut up in the Residency. On the 17th, 18th, 19th, right up to the 23rd, the battle raged at Lucknow and, at last, the besieged army and the relieving army met each other. The Residency, over which so long hung the shadow of death, now assumed a pleasant smile. But, even now, the Revolutionaries did not heed the English victory. Though the two armies had united and the whole city of Lucknow was swimming in a sea of blood, they would talk neither of surrender nor of retreat! On account of this obstinate courage on their part, it was always uncertain when the fighting would be over. So, Sir Colin began again to reform the British army. He evacuated the Residency and collected all the troops in Dilkhwush Bagh. He kept four thousand men and twenty-five guns in Alam Bagh under the command of Outram. He made all arrangements necessary for the future struggle. And for the victory that had been gained, he very properly praised the army for its bravery, discipline, and obedience. Of this praise, the greatest portion was deservedly given to Havelock. 
But while the English army was rightly exulting over its victory, Havelock who had the chief share in it suddenly died!! By the exertions of the terrible battle-field of Lucknow, by care and despair, the brave Havelock had been sinking slowly. And he succumbed at the very moment of victory. 
This death poisoned the joy of the English on the 24th. However, it was not the time for brooding in sorrow over the dead, but for carrying out their uncompleted task. If Havelock fell while taking Lucknow, to take Lucknow was the best way to remember and do honour to his memory. 
But before starting to conquer Lucknow, why these sudden shocks of artillery near Cawnpore? Oh, they might be nothing! So long as the brave Wyndham, with fame in European wars, is there, the noise need not materially disturb Sir Colin. Who is the Revolutionary that would dare to face an English warrior like Wyndham? 
But these messengers say that Tatia Tope is also there! Tatia Tope at Cawnpore! Sir Colin at once understood the meaning of the news of the cannonade he had heard; he sent Outram with the greatest haste against Lucknow and marched at once towards Cawnpore to see that TatiaTope was doing there! 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-VI 
TATIA TOPE 
WHEN the army of the "mutineers" had been defeated at Cawnpore on the 16th of July, Srimant Nana left Cawnpore and proceeded to Brahmavarta. That night - the 16th of July - was spent by Nana in his palace there, in deliberation as to his future plans; and the very next morning saw Nana Sahib approaching the boats waiting on the river Ganges with his youngest brother Bala Sahib, his nephew Rao Sahib, his aide-de-camp Tatia Tope, with all the ladies belonging to the royal household, and with his treasure and a few supplies. Nana was going to Fatehpur in the Lucknow province. Choudhuri Bhopal Singh, an intimate friend of Nana Sahib, received them there very cordially and entertained them in his house. While Havelock with all his army was besieging Cawnpore and was thinking of pressing on to Lucknow, Nana also was deliberating in full Durbar as to the best means of opposing Havelock. 
To find a satisfactory solution to this problem, one person in this Dsurbar was eminently fitted by his extraordinary intellect. His subtle intellect seemed to be ever on the look-out for difficult problems which awaited solution. So far, Tatia Tope had done nothing higher than the work of a clerk; but then, there was nothing beyond the work of a clerk, so far, to be done at Nana's Durbar. But one glimpse of the spirit of liberty - and the Durbar of Nana, too, showed the characteristic intelligence, alertness, and brilliance of the old Raigarh Durbar. New aspirations were now struggling for fulfilment, fresh thrones had to be established, new armies had to be formed, fresh battlefields had to be fought and won. Now, the joy of victory had gladdened the Durbar but, then, the grief consequent on defeat produced 
a reaction. But, in close successioncomes a profound calm; for, vengeance for past insults is being planned; and this calm is being disturbed alone by the still and silent deliberations in the Durbar as to the future plan of the Revolutionary party. It was but natural that the ability, so long latent for lack of scope, should now step forward boldly, that clever schemes, so long only suggested to the mind, should now be readily formulated for action. And it must be admitted that for clever, deep-laid, successful scheming, an equal to Tatia Tope would be hard, indeed, to find. 
Tatia's idea was to reorganise the bands disorganised on account of the defeat at Cawnpore. The splendid logic, the intimate acquaintance with the most secret springs of human nature, and the undaunted daring of this extraordinary man were so superb that whole regiments of rude Sepoys would be ready to rise in his favour with one mind in the course of a single day. When the necessity for reinforcements arose, Tatia had gone straight to Sheorajpur and enlisted the 42nd regiment - lately risen - for the new cause. Meanwhile, Havelock had been preparing to cross the Ganges and advance on Lucknow; so, Tatia decided to harass his rear. How the English commander was, thus, dragged back to Cawnpore, how on his return he saw, to his surprise, the extreaordinary Mahratta ruling in his palace at Brahmavarta, how the English army was forced to give battle at this place, and how, in the encounter, the army of the Revolutionaries was defeated on the 16th of August - all this has been described in a previous chapter. After the defeat, Tatia swam the Ganges with his whole army and joined Nana at Fatehpur. Reinforcements were again necessary. The same problem rose again. But why need Nana worry about reinforcements so long at Tatia Tope was there? The army in the cantonments of Gwalior - anxious to meet the Feringhi in battle - had so far been obliged to keep quiet, because of the 'loyalty' of the Scindia. To Gwalior, then some- one must be sent - and who fitter than the wily Mahratta who, like the magician who waves a spell round his audience, had seduced and kept within the hollow of his hand whole regiments of Sepoys? Tatia, then, went to Gwalior incognito. And 
shortly after, he had seduced the whole army - infantry, cavalry, artillery and all - at Morar, and had even brought them as far as Kalpi. From a military point of view, Kalpi would have been of great help to the Revolutionaries. As the river Jumna flowed between Halpi and Cawnpore, it could serve as a cover against the English army. Tatia realised, then, that after Cawnpore no better base could be secured than the fort of Kalpi and so he took the fort. When Nana heard that he had got a good army and the fort of Kalpi, he consented to make Kalpi his base and sent Shrimant Bala Sahib, as his representative, to occupy the fort and look after it. While Bala Sahib was holding the fort, Tatia began to think of attacking the English army. 
At this time, General Wyndham who had earned fame in the bettle-fields of Europe was the chief commander of the Cawnpore regiments. Sir Colin had gone towards Lucknow leaving this small army to protect Cawnpore. Tatia, then, had got his opportunity. The Resolutionaries of Lucknow were engaging the huge army of Sir Colin and keeping it budy; it would be difficult for general Wyndham to get help from outside; and hence, this was the time to surprise him, engage him, and, if possible, to get rid of him. Such was the plan of Tatia. Bala Sahib thought well of this plan and Tatia himself was made commander of the forces. A mere clerk yesterday, this poor Brahmin of the Durbar of Nana was the commander of to-day. He crossed the Jumna and engaged openly in battle with General Wyndham who had spent a lifetime on the battlefields of Europe! And with what means? With the recentlyrisen unorganised Sepoy mass and with the peasant rabble who had accompanied them! He stood face to face with the English army which had all the advantages that organisation, military training, and discipline could give. It was instructive to watch such an encounter, to see how the spirit of independence could meet all the overwhelming advantages on the opposite side. It was a living example and lesson showing to what extent an army without the advantages of discipline but with the spirit of liberty could fight, illustrating with what success it might have fought had it all the advantages of discipline. With the troops of 
Gwalior which had joined him, Tatia had reached Kalpi on the 9th of November. Kalpi is situated about forty-six miles from Cawnpore. Having accurately ascertained the exact whereabouts of the English army, he left Kalpi, crossed the Jumna, entered the Doab, and, leaving all his treasure and other things at Jalna, occupied some villages adjoining Cawnpore. He was playing a deep game in not rushing on to Cawnpore immediately after crossing the Jumna. He did not want to annoy Wyndham until news came that Sir Colin had begun to engage in the fight at Lucknow. When that news did reach him, he advanced on Sheorajpur, occupying important positions on the way. About the 19th of November, Tatia, by these clever tactics, was able to cut off all supplies from the British army. Meanwhile, the famous commander of the English forces was certainly not idle at Cawnpore. The stream of the English army flowing from Calcutta was stopped at Cawnpore, and Carthew was sent with a division to establish himself on the road to Kalpi. Wyndham coolly awaited Tatia's movements. Would Tatia go on to Ayodhya to cut off the rear of Sir Colin's battalions or would he attack him in Cawnpore itself? 
But Wyndham was not a commander who would wait for ever. His daring nature ever pressed him forward. Moreover, he thoroughly believed in the superstition that English troops were superior not only to Indian troops but all Asiatic troops in general and that the best means of defeating Asiatics was to attack them boldly on the front with one heavy charge. "Strong though you may be, the least hesitation on your part to attack,. The least delay, and the Asiatic becomes proud and conscious of power, and becomes aggressive. Thus, even if you are weak, hesitate not, but charge boldly with one united charge, and the Asiatics would be bewildered and fly before you through mere fright." Such was the thorough belief of the English and, out of the many occasions on which they had acted on this belief, they had been successful on most. It was considered, therefore, quite a rule well-established by experiment, that it was not proportion of numbers but bluff and bullying that was the sure road to 
victory; hence, the advisability of a handful of European troops charging a large mass of Asiatics straight likle an arrow! Every English soldier coming out to India was made to learn this rule by heart and every English historian who wrote a book brought this fact prominently before all. General Wyndham, trained as he was in such warfare and with such ideas, was not likely to allow Tatia to make his movements unhampered. He left Cawnpore immediately and moved towards the bridge over the canal near Kalpi. 
Tatia, meanwhile, moved from Srikhandi to the river Pandu on the 25th November. When the daring enemy approached so near, the English army prepared for battle and the thoroughly- tried antidote against Asiatic courage just referred to was used on the 26th. On that date, Wyndham started his straight-as-an-arrow attack. The Revolutionaries were ambushed in a thick jungle and they began their cannonade on the English army. After a good deal of exchange of shots, the Engliosh took three of the guns of Tatia and Wyndham almost believed that, once again, owing to his bold charge, his army was successful. His army, too felt the assurance of victory. But it was a vain hope. For, soon the English troops were forced to retire steadily. In an instant, the hope of victory was changed into certain defeat and Tatia pursued him until he had retreated up to Cawnpore. The Revolutionary cavalry at their back would neither attack them nor leave them! They wheeled round and round the enemy, forced the enemy back, and themselves reached the gates of Cawnpore. Instead of taking fright at the charge of Wyndham, Tatia himself began the aggressive, meeting charge with charge. 
Says Malleson : "The leader of the rebel army was no fool. The blow dealt by Wyndham, far from frightening him, had disclosed to his mind the weakness of the British leader Tatia Toperead, then, the necessities of Wyndham's position as he would have read an open book and, with the instincts of a real general, he resolved to take advantage of them."23 
23 Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 167. 
Tatia ordered his army which had fought Wsyndham for twenty- four hours without a minute's rest that they were to be ready by the morning to march against the enemy. But they were not to start the attack until another contingent of the Revolutionaries coming from Shewoli and Sheorajpur opened fire on the right flank of the English army. As soon as that began, however, they were to begin the attack in right earnest. Wyndham meanwhile had led forth his army ready for battle; but when, even after nine, the army of the Revolutionaries did not begin the attack and not a sign of them was visible, the English army returned to camp for breakfast. At eleven, the army was made ready for battle. A vague uncertainty as to the real intention of Tatia pervaded the atmosphere. 
This was soon made known, however, in a terrible manner; for, cannon-balls were sent flying from the Revolutionary guns against the right wing of the English. The vanguard, too, was attacked by Tatia. Directly after this, Wyndham sent Carthew with six guns to the road to Brahmavarta to protect that part of Cawnpore. And now a regular cannonade began. Soon it appeared that the English artillery-men were falling back. Tatia had arranged his army in a semicircle and his game was to close on the enemy from the front and the flanks. Wyndham tried his best to break through the circle but the guns of Tatia would not allow him to advance even a step. It seemed they could not even maintain their position, and the English, within a short time, began to show signs of retiring. Seeing that the left wing had retired leaving their guns behind the right wing held on for a time and tried to keep the guns. But they could not hold much longer. As they too retreated, the semicircle of the Revolutionaries closed on them more tightly. By six in the evening, the English army was thoroughly demoralised. A short while more and the rout was complete. Thousands of tents and oxen, a great quantity of provisions and clothing fell into the hands of the Revolutionaries. Half of Cawnpore was now in the hands of Tatia. Thus, the second crown of victory crowned this brave and stalwart Mahratta. 
Yesterday's battle gave him a victory which was but indirect and partial, but today's victory was complete and direct. For he had not merely defeated the clever and famous commander of the English in a battle which lasted a whole day, but he had routed the English army thoroughly; he had captured the whole camp, tents and all; he had driven them out of a portion of Cawnpore and himself retaken the city. Even English historians admit that, if his army had been as disciplined as he was capable, he would have been able to destroy Wyndham's army completely. 
And now the cannonade of Tatia had reached Sir Colin's ears. When Tatia came to Cawnpore, he believed as certain that Sir Colin would be engaged at Lucknow at least for a month. But soon, Tatia heard that, in some unforeseen way, the Revolutionaries had been got rid of by Sir Colin, and it seemed now pretty certain that Sir Colin would attack him, and try to close him in by attacking him from both the sides of the Ganges. Tatia's face clouded with anxiety at this news. Wyndham felt very hopeful. That, very night, Wyndham resolved to win back the glory he had lost during the day. But his men were all tired and therefore, giving up the idea of the night attack, he began to prepare for giving another battle the next morning. He tried to repair the mistakes of the previous day and determined on an attack. The fight began early in the morning. The Revolutionaries aimed their artillery on both flanks of the enemy. The fight went on as on the previous day till midday. But this day, the English did not retire. They assumed the aggressive and began a determined, united, formidable and, as they thought, irresistible, charge. 
Irresistible indeed! The right wing is absolutely shattered! Brigadier Wilson is down! Captain M'Crea is no more! Morphy, Major Stirling, Lieutenant Gibbins, all are down! Aye, Asiatics can produce a Tatia, after all! The third day, then, saw a victory for Tatia and his followers, for they fought hotly and well till late in the evening and they had routed what remained the English army. The English army was more completely routed than even on the day before, both the wings having been actually driven from the field on this last day. And Tatia had now captured the whole of Cawnpore and thus the third crown was shining on the sword of the brave Mahratta.24 
Just when the English army was being routed, the commaner-in- chief, Sir Colin, arrived in their camp. He realisedd the extent of the injury done to British prestige by Tatia; he saw, with his own eyes, the English troops flying for their very life and the victorious troops of the Revolutionaries persuing them; and he heard, with his own ears, the trumpets and drums proclaiming the victory of the Revolutionaries! He saw the importance of the struggle Tatia was carrying on at Cawnpore. 
Tatia on his part realised that Sir Colin was enabled to march back to Cawnpore, just at this juncture, to the help of the English army, only through the utter failure of the Revolutionary party to hold their own at Lucknow. But he did not get disheartened. He smashed the bridge near Ayodhya to render it impossible for the English army to cross the Ganges; he also stationed guns near the place. But the enemy understood his game and, in the face of the fire, crossed from Ayodhya to Cawnpore before the 30th of November. In the camp of Tatia, Nana Sahib and Kumar Singh had also arrived. These leaders dedtermined that, instead of leaving Cawnpore, it would on the whole be more creditable to meet the commander-in-chief in 
24 The following graphic picture is given of the defeat by an English officer : "You will read 
the account of this day's fighting with astonishment; for it tells how English troops, with their 
trophies and their mottoes and their far-framed bravery, were repulsed, and they lost their 
camp, their baggage and position to the scouted and despised natives of India! The beaten 
Feringhis, as the enemy has now a right to call them, have retreated to their entrenchments 
amidst overturned tents, pillaged baggage, men's kits, fleeting camels, elephants and horses, 
and servants. All this is most melancholy and disgraceful." - Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol. 
II, page 190. 
battle, especially as “they had, as their leader, a man of very great natural ability!”25 
Tatia stationed his left wing in a well-protected position between Cawnpore and the Ganges. His centre was right in Cawnpore city. And his right extended behind the Ganges canal and held a bridge over it. In his army, there were ten thousand trained sepoys. With these he kept Sir Colin busy on the 2nd, he actually opened fire on Sir Colin's tent. On the 6th, Sir Colin was forced to accept the open challenge of the Revolutionaries. Consolidating, therefore, his army of seven thousand in an admirable manner, he began his attack on these insolent "mutineers" who could dare to attack the camp on the commander-in-chief himself. Seeing the right wing of the Revolutionaries unprotected, Sir Colin determined to charge on the right. 
But in order to draw off their attention from the right and direct it towards the wrong direction, the English opened fire early in the morning of the 6th on the left wing of the enemy, who were soon engaged in repelling the attack. A mock charge was meanwhile made on the centre, too, by Greathed. So believing that the enemy's objective was the left and the centre, the Revolutionaries began to concentrate their strength on these. While the left was seriously suffering from the artillery of the British, the English began suddenly to return to the right of the Revolutionary army. But the Gwalior contingent stationed on the right by Tatia began a furious cannonade on the Sikhs and the English who were charging. The rifles of the Panday army, too, were very active. But the Sikhs made, "double march", and rushed forward, being backed up by Peel's white troops, and the Gwalior army, under this double fire, showed signs of retiring. As soon as that was apparent, the fire of the enemy was reduced and soon the Gwalior army was scattered completely. All their guns were captured and a furious pursuit of them began on the Kalpi road. A complete victory was thus 
25 Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.IV, page 186. 
obtained by Sir Colin so far as the right wing was concerned; but, he was not satisfied with that. He had an idea of blocking completely the road to brahmavarta on the left, as he had blocked the road to Kalpi on the right, and thus, of capturing Tatia with his whole army. So he despatched Mansfield to the road leading to Brahmavarta. On this day, the well- established proposition about Asiatics, referred to above, seemed to have been confirmed both positively and negatively. The feigned attack on the left made by Greathed was so weak that, had the Pandays made but one attempt to repel it, not only would Greathed have been punished in a way he would have remembered to the end of his life, but the very fortunes of the day would have been changed. As it was, the Revolutionaries began to give way under the straight attack of the English. While this affirmative part of the proposition, viz., that, at a good charge and at a show of audacity, the Asiatics lose heart, was being confirmed on the centre emphatically; on the left, the negative part too was being realised in an unmistakably clear way. For when the Revolutionaries saw Mansfield coming, crouching a roundabout and concealed manner, they attacked him even though he had a large division. Nana himself commanded the left. He took full advantage of the slow movements of Mansfield. When Sir Colin was inquiring whether Tatia had been hemmed in or not, he heard with regret that through the dilatory movements of Mansfield, he had been foiled in his desire. He did not succeed in capturing Tatia Tope! 
For, that Mahratta general had pressed Mansfield and pressed him as far as Brahmavarta. He had broken through the network of the English army, and had gone off with his army and with all his guns. How many more networks the English general would have to spread before they could succeed in capturing the Mahratta tiger will appear in a future chapter. 
Though Tatia was able to escape, on this day, with all his men and all his guns, Hope Grant was pursuing him closely and, on the 9th of December, a running fight ensured between Tatia and the English near Sheorajpur; and, though Tatia did break through this time too, most of his 
gung fell into the hands of the enemy. Thus, in an intervcal of two days between the 6th and the 9th, Sir Colin was able to repair the defeat of Wyndham, to capture thirty-two of the Revolutionary guns, and to break up their army, forcing some towards Kalpi and the rest on to Ayodhya. After obtaining these big victories, he thought that minor victories were surely within reach. So, he marched on to Brahmavarta, looted the property there, razed the palace to the ground, and, to crown all his triumph, demolished the sacred temples of that city. 
It was in this palace that the brightest gems of India, Nana and Tatia, Bala and Rao, and the "Chhabeli" of Jhansi had been bred and brought up. It was this palace that first conceived the Warf of Independence of that glorious year. The temples of that city had blessed the birth of the ideal. When the throne of Raigarh which had been snatched from the Mahrattas had been re-established again in this palace washed by a free flow of the stream of English blood, the palace and these temples had been illuminated. That very fire which could produce all the illuminations had been instrumental in reducing them to-day to ashes. But history need not drop a tear on these scared ashes. For this palace and these temples had been burnt down only after they had accomplished their task. The very extinction of such structures is more inspiring, a thousand times more life-giving, than the existence of hundreds of other structures which are but monuments of slavery; for these have attempted to give birth to independence; and they have died in that attempt. Far more profitable is death through the attempt to establish Swaraj than life in slavery. The sacred fuel burning in the sactificial fire is a thousand times more life-giving than the log of wood burning in the funeral pyre. 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-VII 
THE FALL OF LUCKNOW 
AFTER thus stemming the fierce tide of Tatia's progress at Cawnpore, Sir Colin started reconquering the other portions of the country that had risen. Seaton had been marching slowly, 'paficying' provionces on the way, and had now come down to Aligarh. So now Walpole was sent by Kalpi road to accomplish the same task for all the territory from Aligarh to Cawnpore. Walpole was to march upwards from Cawnpore and Seaton was to go downwards from Aligarh; they were to meet at Minpuri; and, thus, all the tract of the Doab along the Jumna was to be reconquered. While this was being done, Sir Colin was to march towards Fatehgarh from Cawnpore. Such was the plan of operations. It was thought that the Doab Revolutionaries would be pressed back by the English army and would eventually enter Fatehgrah. And hence it was decided that the closing finale of the operations should be conducted and a great battle should be fought near Fatehgarh, where the three armies of Walpole, Seaton, and Campbell were to meet after the close of their individual operations. 
According to this plan, on the 18th of December, Walpole, with all his guns and his army, began his upward march from Cawnpore on the Kalpi road. After fighting one or two skirmishes with scattered Revolutionary bands all along the way, wreaking cruel vengeance - the well- known and customary Feringhi vengeance - on all persons indiscriminately, innocent people as well as those who actually fought against England, and on the villages which had sheltered the Pandays; and, by such means, trying to bring back the territory under British allegiance, this Walpole came as far as Itawa and, of course, he would have gone further. But, though the 
Revolutionaries in Itawa had all left, he had still to stop, with all his army, in that city. What could be the reason of this extraordinary necessity? What could stop this march of the English army? Was it that Revolutionary troops, in large numbers, had attacked him? Or could it be infantry or the cavalry? Or was it by any chance the artillery with the fierce fire playing all round? 
No, none of these things were happening in Itawa. Neither the infantry nor the cavalry, nor the fire of the artillery was stopping the English at Itawa. Only twenty or twenty-five Indian heroes are making a stand from youder building. That building has a roof and its walls have holes made in them for fixing the muskets. It is these twenty-five men, standing with a musket in their hand and a burning fire in their heart, that have made the fully-equipped English stop at the door of Itawa. Itawa blocked the passage of the English army notwithstanding the guns and cannon that it carried, because Itawa had not yet received its usual toll due to it as of right. That toll was that everyone who dared enter the threshold of Itawa against its wishes should fight first. The challenge was "Fight first!" These twenty-five men had determined to sell their lives dear, though escape was easy. What battle could be given to these handful of people in this building? If probably they waited for a few minutes, these mad people would come to their senses and make their escape, which was yet open to them - so thought the English. But though they waited long, there seemed no possible chance of the "mutineers" coming to their senses. So, an engagement was at last decided upon. The mere show of the artillery would, it was thought, be sufficient to make them fly. The English, therefore, exhibited their artillery and tried to frighten the Revolutionaries. 
But, fear could exist only in the hearts of ordinary mortals. Those who, charmed by the ideal of independence, welcomed death as the only means of achieving the ideal - who could succeed in frightening these? Who fights for victory fears; who bittles for glory, even, may fear; but who could frighten him who fights for death alone? The utmost one can be afraid 
of is death! But he who has overstepped those limits and who smiles on death, what could frighten him? What could come in the way of such a man? Not all the thunders and all the lightnings of dread heaven could stop his progress; for his progress is towards death and those elements are only rendering his task easier. He who hopes for death alone has no room for despair. These national heroes of Itawa who courted death in battle with the ardour of a lover for his love, what could frighten them, then? 
And so they willingly relinquished all the ways and means of escape they had. They had not the slightest hope of victory and yet they defied the English army and loudly called on them to join battle. That army of the English which did not stop for the ramparts of Delhi nor for the walls of Cawnpore nor for the siege of Lucknow, now had to stop before this insignificant-looking building! 
Malleson says: "Few in number, armed only with muskets, they were animated by a spirit fiercer even than the spirit of despair - by a determination to die martyrs to their cause. Walpole reconnoitred the place. It was, for a place to stop an army, insignificant. It would easily be stormed. Yet to storm it in the face of its occupants would cost valuable life and it seemed that easier and less costly means were available. These easy means were at first tried. Hand-grenades were thrown in; an attempt was made to smoke out the occupants with burning straw. But all in vain. Through their loop-holes, the rebels poured in a constant and effective fire on the assailants and, for three hours, kept them at bay. At last, it was resolved to blow up that place. For this purpose, Bourchier, aided by Scatchley of the Engineers, made a mine with a number of his gun cartridges. The explosion of this conferred upon the defenders the martyr's honours they coveted. It buried them in the ruins." 
The dynamite exploded the building. The highly coveted honour of martyrdom was, thus, gained by these heroes who longed fot it. They died on the spot and were buried in the ruins. And this sacred mausoleum of 
Itawa, since that day, has been preaching a silent and terrible sermon, by day and by night, on How to die in defence of a Noble cause!! 
Brave Itawa! Glorious for ever! What better, what holier inspiration could one find in the pass of Thermopylae, the ramparts of Breccia, or the stand of De Reuter in the Netherlands! All glory to Itawa! Itawa for ever! When Walpole reached Itawa, Seaton too had passed Aligarh, Kashgunj, and Minpuri, and was engaging in small skirmishes the Revolutionary bands. The two armies met at Minpuri on the 8th of January, 1858. In accordance with their previous plans, the banks of the Jumna, near the Doab, had been reconquered by the British army from Delhi and Meerut as far as Allahabad. Meanwhile, Sir Colin had been marching along the Ganges. He had crushed the Nawab of Fatehgarh and had thus destroyed the last resort of the Doab Revolutionaries, and he was now going towards Fatehgarh from Cawnpore, bent on clearing the territory of the Doab, as far as the Ganges and the Jumna on either side, of the enemy altogether. The Nawab of Farrukabad, as has been already told, had declared his independence at Fatehgarh. The Doab Revolutionaries had flocked into Fatehgarh from all the adjoining parts. Sir Colin had many small engagements with these. As these Revolutionary troops were mostly composed of undisciplined people who had been defeated at Delhi and Cawnpore and had run away from the battle-field in those placed, they used to fly before the English, before the engagements had even begun, just to save their lives. But did they succeed in saving their lives by these dastardly means? Not at all. The English pursued them hard and, at times, would kill 600 or 700, sometimes even a thousand of the fleeing enemy. What a world of difference between the dying of those Itawa heroes and these! And the Nawab of Farukabad had soon to suffer the consequences of this dastardly conduct of these bands. His capital, his forts, and his military supplies fell into the hands of British and all the Revolutionaries were driven across the Ganges and into Rohilkhand. With the military supplies that were captured, 
Nadir Khan, the avowed enemy of the British, also fell into their hands. This Nadir Khan had fought the English on several occasions with credit under the flag of Nana Sahib at Cawnpore. As soon as such a formidable opponent fell into their hands, they hanged him. This Nadir Khan, at the point of death, swore a terrible oath "calling upon the people of India to draw their swords and assert their independence by the extermination of the English."26 This was the burning message delivered with his last dying breath by this glorious patriot, Nadir Khan. 
On the 4th of January 1858, at the time when Sir Colin entered Fatehgarh in triumpt, all the Doab and all the country from Benares upwards as far as Meerut had been reconquered by the British. So, now, the question was what was to be the future plan of operations of the British army? The hope of the British, that, when the flames of rebellion had been extinguished in the Doab, the insurrections in other parts would quietly settle down, now proved absolutely futile. Experts in political astrology had prophesied that, within eight days of the fall of Delhi, the "mutiny" would be no more. As a matter of fact, the Revolution did not perish by the fall of Delhi, and all these prophecies had proved false. For the huge mass of the Revolutionary army, so far confined to Delhi, spread tumultuously all over the country like a river overflowing its banks. The troops of Rohilkhand under Bakht Khan, of Neemuch under Veer Singh, and other armies under their various Subahdars, instead of surrendering to the English, continued the war from other parts of the country. Once, right in Delhi itself, there seemed signs of another insurrection of the populace. For, a rumour had spread all over the city that Nana, after his victory at Cawnpore, had marched on to effect the release of the Emperor whom the English had imprisoned. Secret orders were immediately given to the military authorities that, should Nana really come to Delhi, the guards should rush in and shoot down the old Emperor like a rabbit!27 Since the fall of Delhi, the Revolutionaries had become even 
26 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 232. 27 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 184. 
fiercer than before. They did not mind defeat now. The first ebullitions due to their victory had settled down by this time. A stoical calmness had now come over their hearts. Their one thought was that whatever happened they were to go on fighting. Either the Feringhis or they must be exterminated. They had determined, once for all, that, so long as neither of these was accomplished, they would continue the war to the end. They were quarrelling amongst themselves; some, for personal gain, were getting lawless; but to one was willing to give up the fight against the English. And, if ever this determination – never to keep down the sword until either the Feringhi or themselves had become extinct – appeared clearer than ever on the firmly set jaws, the contracted eyebrows, or the stern eye of the Revolutionaries, it was after the defeat in the Doab. Before the Sepoys who were captured in battle were hanged, they were usually questioned by the English why they joined in the war, and the Revolutionaries would answere clearly and sternly, “It is the command of religion that Feringhis should be killed!” And the end? The extermination of the English and of the Sepoys! And then? What God wills, will be done!28 
Thus, after the fall of Delhi, the desire of liberty, instead of dying out, took only more fire. And to avenge Delhi, they continued the fight in Lucknow and Bareilley. For when the Doab had fallen to the English, the territories of Ayodhya and Rohilkhand were under the complete control of the Revolutionaries. Therefore,. Sir Colin's idea was to conquer Rohilkhand first and then to proceed to Lucknow. Lord Canning urged that, once the focus of the operations of the Mutineers, namely Lucknow, was destroyed, the smaller places would surrender easily. In deference, therefore, to the orders of Lord Canning, Sir Colin determined first to attend to Lucknow. As previously agreed, Seaton, Walpole, and the commander-in- 
28 “The slaughter of the English is required by our religion. The end will be the destruction of all the Ebglish and all the Sepoys, - and then, God knows!” – Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 242. chief had brought together at Fatehgarh about ten or eleven thousand troops. In all the strategic positions of the Doab, small garrisons were stationed for keeping the province in hand. The army was reinforced by afresh batch of troops sent from Agra. With their larger reinforcements, Sir Colin started from Fatehgarh. English historians thus describe the magnitude of the English Forces at this time: " Onao and Bunni deserts had probably never witnessed such big armies, engineers, artillery, horses, infantry, carriages full of supplies, camp-followers , tents big and small; all arrangements were complete in every particular. Seventeen battalions of infantry (of which fifteen were English), twenty-eight squadrons of cavalry (which included four European regiments), fifty-four light guns, and eighty big guns were included!” Thus, on the 23rd of February 1858, Sir Colin Campbell left Cawnpore, and crossed the Ganges again with such a splendidly equipped and large army in order to punish Lucknow. 
Oh Ganga, witness these strong English troops coming to destroy Ayodhya! And, O proud Ayodhya, are you at least now going to humble yourself to the dust frightened by these odds? 
Ayodhya must have felt that the crossing of the Ganges by the English was to destroy her. She must have felt for the reduction to dust of her villages and for the destruction of her temples and images by dynamite;29 but not so much for all these things as for the fact that the Nepalese troops of Jung Bahadur were advancing on her. It was this that brought tears to the melancholy eyes of Ayodhya; it was advancing of this army that cast a shadow upon her face. Ayodhya was not a coward to fear the advance of the English army; for, if she had been, she would not have attempted to cast off the hated yoke of England. The very day that Ayodhya drove away from her domain the English authority by force, that very day, she was aware that an English army would soon advance on her; and aware of this, this brave Ayodhya had already stepped forth to the battle, with her 
29 Russel’s Diary, page 218. 
thousand arms. But Ayodhya was not aware that on her would advance the Nepalese army of Jung Bahadur also. That the enemy would try to massacre her, she knew; but she did not know that her friends, her brothers, too, would raise the axe of destruction against her. She was ready to wrestle with the English, but she was ignorant of the shameful fact that she would have to wage war with a portion of Hindusthan herself, for the liberty of Hindusthan. And, thus, when, as if to mock at poor Ayodhya, Jung Bahadur started with the Nepalese troops to advance on her, Ayodhya looked in the direction of those troops only and began to shed tears of grief. 
For, atr the very time when the huge British army was crossing the Ganges with Sir Colin at the head, Jung Bahadur too with the Nepalese was advancing on Lucknow to help his friends, the English! The English were his friends and the Hindusthanees were his enemies! Those who greased the cartridges with the fact of the cow were his confederates, and those who refused to bite them were his enemies! This Jung Bahadur, this blot on Indian history, brought eternal disgrace on himself and his family by joining the English as soon as he heard that the fight for Swaraj had begun. A little before 1857 he had visited England, and English historians assert that it was because he had seen with his own eyes the might and the glory of the English that he did not dare to fight against them! Was the glory and might of England indeed so awe-inspiring? If Jung Bahadur had been to England, Azimullah, the minister of Nana, too had been there; and so, also, Rango Bapuji; and history clearly records how this might have affected them, and how for every indication of that power, they only formed a fresh resolve to shatter it to pieces. The might of England alone would not explain the conduct of Jung Bahadur. The English glory only gave an additional stimulus to the patriotic hearts of Azimullah and Rango to make their Mother-Country a crowned queen with the tilaka of Independence adorning her brow. On the other hand, the sight of English power whispered to snake- like Treachery that, if it helped to keep the Mother a slave of this might, perhaps two more crumbs would fall to its lot. 
And this Jung Bahadur, ready to sell his Mother for a mess of potage, sent his Nepalese to the English. First, three thousand Gurkhas from Khatmandu, in the beginning of August 1857, descended on Azimgarh and Jawanpur to the east of Ayodhya. Mahomed Hussein, the leader of the Gorakhpur Revolutionaries, was ready to meet them on the field. When the English were fighting in the Doab, Veni Madhav, Mahomed Hussein, and Raja Nadir Khan had, with credit to themselves, reconquered completely the parts round Benares and to the east by Ayodhya. Even before the English troops had time to look to Oudh, the Nepalese had pressed back the Revolutionaries towards Outh. Within a few more days, Jung Bahadur and the British came to a definite agreement and three armies were ready to advance on this province. On the 23rd of December 1857, Jung Bahadur and Rowcroft started each with a large division of the British army. And, crushing the Revolutionary armies on the way, on the north of Benares and to the east of Oudh, these three armies began to enter Oudh. 
About the 25th of February, 1858, the Nepalese and the English crossed the Ghogra and marched toward Ambarpur. On the way, there was a strong fort in a very thick jungle, possessing great strategic advantages. It would not have been safe for the English Army to proceed onwards without taking this fort. Hence the Nepalese were directed to attack this fort. The fort engaged in fight and continued it very vigorously in the face of this well- equipped enemy. The reader may inquire the strength of the army inside the fort which dared to stop this huge army on its way. It was an army composed of thirty-four persons only! But the minds of all of them were filled with the inspiring ideal of independence and it is this which gave them the strength to fight the enemies of the country in spite of such odds The Nepalese fought with determination. Their opponents fought with still greater vigour. Patgriotisn maintained its fight with Treachery. Everyone kept and maintained his place fighting, struggling hard. The name Ambarpur (Heavenly City) was eminently fitting to this fort; Ambarpur fought so well that it killed seven of the enemy and wounded forty-three. It fought so well 
that thirty-three out of the thirty-four who defended it, were killed without moving from their posts, and still the thirty-fourth did not cease from the fight! And it was only when the thirty-fourth was killed, after maintaining the fight to the very end, that the enemy could enter the fort. The fort of Ambarpur fought as Delhi could not fight, as Lucknow could not fight!30 
After Ambarpur had been taken, the united forces of the Gurkhas and the English marched on reducing the country all the way. After them was also coming General Franks who, after engaging with Nazim Mahomed Hussain Franks who, after engaging with Nazim Mahomed Hussein and Commander Banda Hussein at Sultanpur, Budayan, and other places, was advancing upwards Oudh. In order to repair the loss of prestige caused by the recent defeats and to regain the authority till refently maintained in that part of eastern Oudh, the Lucknow Durbar sent Gafoor Beg, who was chief of the artillery under Wajid Ali Shah, to drive back Franks. But in the important battle of Sultanpur which took place on the 3rd of February he was defeated and, at the end of that month, there was no enemy left for the army of General Franks to encounter with in those parts. 
All these armies were approaching Lucknow to joinSir Colin. General Franks turned towards Daurara with the intention of taking the fort there; but, as the defenders of the fort maintained the fight in spite of the loss of their guns, General Franks had to acknowledge his defeat and retire. As a matter of fact, Franks had engaged in many a battle and been successful in most; nor could any harm have come through this small and unexpected defeat. But discipline and responsibility were maintained so well and vigorously in the English army at that time that, in spite of the innumerable victories of Franks, Sir Colin struck his name out from the list 
30 "It was defended with so much vigour and resolution that the assailants lost seven men 
killed and forty-three wounded before they gained possession of it. The defendants died all at 
their posts." - Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 227. 
of the officers who were to command the English divisions in the important battle that was soon to take place. 
Now, the several portions of the British army advancing on Lucknow began to approach nearer and nearer to one another. While Sir Colin’s huge army starting from Cawnpore was approaching from the west, the armies of Franks and Jung Bahadur were advancing from the east. Before the 11th of March, these two armies met together and their swords were out to massacre the “sinful” city. 
Sinful? Not sinful but only unfortunate! While the swords of fellow-countrymen and foreigners were smiting hard, was Lucknow doing anything to meet them? Since the time - in November of the previous year - when Sir Colin hurried towards Cawnpore to watch Tatia's movements, till March, every patriot who was in Lucknow was trying his best, each in his own way, to protect Lucknow, and destroy the enemy. In honour of the flag of Swaraj which was floating high in Lucknow, everyone, from the Rajas to the poverty-stricken peasants, took his life in his hands and began the fight. Some of these Rajas and Zemindars had personally and individually lost nothing by the advent of English rule; nay, some of them had actually been benefited by it. But the noble principle that what cannot benefit the country cannot in the end benefit individuals, the noble determination not to give up duty at any time through love of personal gain, the Rajpur feeling that death is preferable to loss of honour, and the realisation of the truth that there can be no self-respect, no manhood, without liberty - all these noble ideas filled and pervaded the aristocracy of Lucknow. The Zemindars of Lucknow did not rise merely because they had suffered through the revenue assessment of the English but because they hated foreign rule! This is not merely our opinion but the deliberate opinion of the then Governor-General, as will be seen from the following extracts : "You seem to think that the Rajas and Zemindars of Oudh have risen because they have personally suffered by our land-revenue assessment. But, in the opinion of the Governor- General, this requires some more thought. More thorough-going hatred could hardly have 
been shown by any feudatories than was shown by the Rajas of Chanda, Bhinja, and Gonda. Not a single village of the first of these had been taken by us. Not only that but even his tribute had been reduced. The second one also was treated as generously. Of the four hundred villages of the third, only three had been taken and, in exchange for that, his tribute had been reduced by ten thousand Rupees. 
"By the change of rulers, no one had gained more than the youthful Raja of Nowpara. As soon as the English government came in, we gave him one thousand villages and, setting asided all other claimants, we appointed his mother as his guardian. But from the first, her army has been fighting us at Lucknow. The Raja of Dhura, too, gained enormously by the changes. But his own men attacked Captain Hursey, captured his wife, and sent her to prison in Lucknow. 
"Ashraf Baksh Khan, the Talukdar persecuted by his late master, was made at once sole owner of all his property. But from the beginning, his hatred of us has been most keen. These and other similar examples go to show very clearly that not mere personal loss, due to our rule, has been responsible for the rising of the Zemindars and Rajas against us."31 
And so the English historian, Holmes, frankly admits that several of the Rajas and Zemindars who had begun and maintained the War of Independence were inspired by a nobler idea than mere personal gain. "There were numerous Rajas and petty chiefs who, without any substantial grievance to brood over, were always fretting against the restraints of the Government, the very existence of which was always reminding them of the fact that they belonged to a conquered nation Among all these millions, there was no real loyalty towards the alien government which had been forced to impose itself upon them. In trying to estimate the conduct of the 
31 Lord Canning's Reply to the letter of Sir James Outram. (Re-translated from the Marathi 
translation in the original). 
people of India during the mutiny, it is important to bear in mind that it would have been unnatural for them to feel towards an alien government like ours, the loyalty that can only co-exist with patriotism. Those of them who regarded our rule beneficial helped us or, at least, left us free to help ourselves. But there was not one of them who would not have turned against us, if he had once come to believe that we would be overthrown!"32 
Those who blood boiled at the very name of foreign domination, those who had stepped forth into the battle field leaving their all to unfurl the honoured flag of Swaraj, Rajas, Maharahas, Zemindars, and Talukdars had, be it remembered, one amongst them, at this time, who was the first in the field to protect the revered throne of Lucknow and who was, at the same time, the ablest in the council. This extraordinary man had been for four months moving here and there with lightning-like activity, inspiring by his presence both the battle-field and the council-hall. 
Readers, this hero is none other than the Patriot of Fyzabad, Ahmad Shah Moulvie! With the burning torch of the Revolutionary War in his hand, he had been setting the whole country aflame, when the English authorities at Lucknow captured him and ordered him to be hanged. But, before being executed, he was taken to the prison at Fyzabad and there the storm of 1857 raised him from his cell in the alien's prison to the leadership of the Revolution. This national hero, Ahmad Shah Moulvie, was on the battlefield for the freedom of his country and the protection of his Dharma. He inspired by his tongue thousands of his countrymen on the platform and, on the field of battle, by his valour he earned the admiration of friends as well as foes. When Sir Colin went to fight with Tatia, he had left Outram, in Alam Bagh with four thousand troops. Since that day, the Moulvie was working day and night to take advantage of this weakening of the enemy's 
32 Sepoy War by Holmes. (Re-translated from the Marathi Translation in the original). 
forces. Many a time, ere this, had Lucknow been protected by the diplomacy and diversions created by Nana near Cawnpore. The isolated army at Lucknow had been brought under the complete control of the Pandays. When the British army crossed the Ganges to capture Lucknow, Nana had pressed on Cawnpore and dragged the forces of the enemy back into Doab. But Lucknow had not taken full and determined advantage of this diversion. The Moulvie tried his best not to let go the other chance which had fallen in his way through the ability of Tatia. Though the Begum of Oudh was the chief authority in the place, it seemed that her efforts could not succeed in uniting and concentrating the Revolutionaries, Rajas, and Maharajas; internal disorganisation and carelessness had rendered useless many fine opportunities of destroying the handful of the British army by a good determined charge. Delhi had fallen; Cawnpore, also, had fallen; Fatehgarh had shared the same fat; and thousands of defeated Revolutionaries from the neighbouring parts had come to Lucknow. But, instead of helping Oudh, they became a source of mischief by disobedience to authority. It appeared certain that this last attack of the British who were flushed with their victories and well reinforced by numberless new troops would carry everything before them. But the Moulvie turned darkness into light. This patriotic Moulvie inspired with high patriotism many an Indian heart by his eloquence and the force of his personality. He showed that it was possible still to beat the English, if attempts were made to act with one mind and make concentrated charges against them. He inspired the Durbar with the confidence that he possessed and evoked some order out of the chaos in the army. He had great difficulties to cope with. Some incapables grew jealous of his growing influence in the Durbar and so brought about his arrest and imprisonment. But as the Moulvie had more influence over the Sepoys than the Begum herself, and as, further, the troops from Delhi trusted and obeyed him implicitly, pressure was brought to bear upon the Begum by these people and the Moulvie was released and his influence restored. After he was released, he was asked his opinion about the military situation. He replied, "The auspicious moment has passed. Things are out of joint. Now, 
we should fight only because it is our duty." His influence over the populace of Lucknow was as great as ever. And he ended the petty quarrels amongst the troops and created in their minds a fresh inspiration and enthusiasm and desire to take up their swords for the destruction of the enemy knocking at their gates. 
But he did not stop with this activity alone. Very often he himself would personally lead them to the battles. Whenever Hindusthanees attacked Alam Bagh, the Moulvie was always to be seen in the very forefront of battle. On the 22nd of December, he had made a clever plan of deceiving the English army at Alam Bagh and hemming them in. He gave the slip to the English and marches on the road to Cawnpore with his troops. He had given orders that, as soon as he was behind the English army, a charge was to be made against the front of the English army by the division of the Revolutionaries that was at Alam Bagh. The plan was admirable and bound to have succeeded but for the other division. The leader of the other division could not maintain discipline among his followers. Everyone wanted to go by his own counsel, conscious of his own wisdom and, before the first charge had even commenced, they turned their back on the enemy instead of meeting the charge. On account of such cowardice and want of discipline, the Revolutionaries were defeated even though the Moulvie had carried out his part of the scheme most admirably. 
But the Moulview did not cease in his attempts to destroy the English army. On the 15th of January, the Revolutionaries received news that the English army was advancing from Cawnpore, carrying provisions and help to the British troops at Alam Bagh. They began to discuss the best means of stopping those supplies. But only discussions went on. No scheme was decided on, no arrangement adopted. Disgusted at the cowardice of the rest, the noble Moulvie swore before all that he would enter Lucknow right through the British army after having captured the convoy of the enemy. With this resolve, keeping his movements as far as possible concealed from the enemy, the Moulvie marched with his men on to the road towards 
Cawnpore. But through Indian spies, Outram was already informed of this and he had already sent a party to attack the Moulvie's men. The battle began. The Moulvie, in order to encourage his men to do their utmost, himself fought in the front and did his very best. In the course of the engagement he was shot in the hand and fell down. The English had been most anxious for a long time to capture him. But the Revolutionaries skilfully placed him in a doli and brought him to Lucknow in great haste. When it was known that the Moulvie had been wounded, everybody was anxious about his condition. But they felt that the best way of showing their regard and respect for him was to complete the work that he had begun; and, therefore, without a moment's rest, Videhi Hanuman - a brave Brahmin - started on the 17th of January and made a desperate charge on the English troops. From ten in the morning to six in the evening, this brave man was fighting in the front ranks. In the evening, however, he was dangerously wounded and captured. The Revolutionaries were disorganised and ran away completely routed. These defeats increased the disorganisation in the Revolutionary camp. Charaterless Sepoys demanded pay before fighting. Though their pay had been given them in advance, they demanded more before they would consent to take the field. That the resolute, daring, and capable Begum still maintained, in spite of all these disorders, the whole administration intact is a sure indication of her grit.33 While these defeats 
33 Sir W.Russell says about this Begum : "The great bulk of the Sepoy army is supposed to 
be inside Lucknow, but they will not fight as well as the match-lock-men of Oudh who have 
followed their chiefs to maintain the cause of their young king, Birjis Kadir, and who may be 
fairly regarded as engaged in a patriotic war for their country and their sovereign. The Sepoys 
during the siege of the Residency never came on as boldly as the Zemindari levies and Nujeibs. 
The Begum exhibits great energy and ability. She has excited all Oudh to take up the interests 
of her son and the chiefs have sworn to be faithful to him. We effect to disbelieve his legitimacy 
but the Zemindars who ought to be better judges of the fact accept Birjis Kadir without 
hesitation. Will Government treat these men as rebels or as honourable enemies? The Begum 
declares undying war against us. It appears from the energetic characters of these Ranees and were following one upon another, the chief minister of revenue of the Begum, Raja Balkrishna Singh, died. Hardly was his would healed when the Moulvie again rushed into the field – on the 15th of February. He was anxious to finish Outram before Sir Colin was able to return from Cawnpore. But, day by day, the cowardice of the Sepoys was increasing beyond measure. All the Moulvie’s efforts were thus baffled and, on that day too, the Revolutionaries were defeated. But he went on fighting still. Amazed at the bravery of this man, the historian Holmes records in his book; “If however, the mass of the rebels were cowards, their leader was a man fitted both by his spirit and his capacity to support a great cause and to command a great army. This was Ammadullah – the Moulvie of Fyzabad.”9 All those who were fighting with the incomporable strength of calm philosophy fought bravely. The brave Subahdar of the 60th regiment swore to drive away the English from Alam Bagh in eight days and worked hard in the field to effecthis purpose. One day, the Begum herself came on the field with all the army. But the unfortunate Lucknow could not get any victory. 
At last, Sir Colin joined the English troops before Alam Bagh. The English were straining every nerve to take Lucknow. But despite their innumerable attacks, that town had proudly stood so far under the flag of Swaraj. But now the English had determined not to move without taking it. As the English had concentrated all their forces at this place, so the Revolutionaries, too, were straining every nerve to give a good fight. All the fighting force of Oudh was there. From every village and every field came the patriotic rural population, with determination to drive away the Feringhis or die in the attempt. Charles Ball writes, "The whole country was swarming with armed vagabonds hastening to Lucknow to meet their 
Begums that they acquire in their Zenanas and harems a considerable amount of actual mental 
power and, at all events, become able intrigantes. Their contests for the ascendency over the 
minds of men give vigour and acuteness to their intellect." - Russell's Diary, page 275. 
common doom and die in the last grant struggle with the Feringhis."34 There were thirty thousand Sepoys and fifty thousand volunteers gathered together in that city. All those who had taken the oath before the Revolutionary war, all those who had eaten the chapatee, all those who had smelt the red lotus flower, all those to whom had come the sacred messenger of the Revolution, all these patriots swarmed into Lucknow armed to the teeth with the object of fighting for their country and for their king. At least eighty thousand men were armed in that city.35 In street and lane, barricades and entrenchments were erected; houses had ramparts made and holes bored in the walls for muskets or guns to be mounted; heroic spirits were posted on very wall; to the east, large canals were dug from the Gautami river and guns were stationed to command them; huge ramparts, three in one row, were erected right from Dilkhwush Bagh to Kaisar Bagh; the palace itself was reinforced with armed Sepoys and mounted with guns. In short, all parts except the northern portion of the city were fortified admirably by the Revolutionaries. 
Sir Colin recognised the weakness of the northern side and, from this very side, he began the attack. Before this, neither Havelock, nor Outram, nor Colin himself had attacked Lucknow from that side and, as the Gautami was on that side, the Revolutionaries naturally thought that 
the north needed no protection. But Outram took full advantage of this weak link to the chain of their defences and, as this point gave way under the charge of Outram, the other defences were rendered useless. On the 6th of March, the British began their operations on the north of Lucknow. Soon after, the troops under Sir Colin had increased to nearly thirty thousand, and 
34 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, p. 241. 
35 How the imagination is relied upon in giving the exaggerated numbers of the Revolutionaries will be best seen from the following example. Sir Hope Grant says that there were “thirty thousand Sepoys and fifty thousand volunteers” at Lucknow. Colonel Maleson records : “The total army of the mutineers was one hundred and twenty-one thousand;” and the civil commissioner who accompanied Sir Colin says : “Their army was exactly two lakhs.” Poor Holmes is simply bewildered at these amazing contradictions. 
so the English attacked simultaneously from the north and the east. Sir Colin had so divided his army that not a single Revolutionary should escape alive from Lucknow. Though all the plans of the Pandays had been upset on account of the attack on the quarter least expected, namely, the northern side, they carried on their struggle, day and night frim the 6th to the 15th of March. For the third time in a single year, blood flowed freely in this unfortunate city. The British troops stormed one fort after another - Dilkhwush Bagh, Kadam Rasool, Shah Najeef, Begum Kothi, and others - and continued their advance. On the 10th, Hodson was killed by the Revolutionaries. It was this man that had shot down in cold blood the surrendered, innocent, unarmed Mughal princes of Delhi. Lucknow then avenged Delhi by killing this wicked criminal. On the 14th the British army entered right into the Palace. Giving a description of this triumph, Malleson writes : "Its greatness and magnificence were due mainly to the Sikhs and the 10th foot!" 
But, while Sir Colin was overjoyed at this unique triumph in Kaisar Bagh, the news from Outram’s side disconcerted him not a little. For, though Lucknow had fallen, its thousands of Revolutionaries did not surrender or give up the fight; but, with their King and with the resourceful Begum, they had broken through the troops which tried to hem them in. 
And while, in Lucknow, streams of blood are flowing profusely on every side, while the triumphant British army is looting the palace, secure from danger, and while the Queen-mother and the King have left Lucknow, where, the reader asks, is Ahmad Shah? 
Let everyone bow down his head to do honour to this hero of heroes! The proud Moulvie is making his entrance again into the city, with his handful of followers. His proud heart hates like poison the idea that Lucknow should fall, and that right in Lucknow English bayonets should cause bloodshed; he wants that, though Lucknow should fall, its name should not lie low; and so he leaves his post outside the city - and, while the 
Feringhis are laughing and joking and talking in the streets of Lucknow, attempts an entry into Lucknow! Annoyed by insults offered to his king, careless of his life, mad with devotion to his country, this Ahmad Shah Moulvie, only in order that history should record that Lucknow did not fall without a glorious fighting, entered a small part of the town, known as Shahdat Ganj, and there began to fight the enemy with his handful of followers. As Mazzini had clung to Rome, all alone, though the enemy had entered it and taken complete possession of it, so this Moulvie too, when all the other Revolutionaries had left Lucknow, when thousands of British troops were in it, continued the fight with the strength that despair gives! He thrust his hand right into the jaws of this Feringhi serpent, for it had swallowed Lucknow, and he wanted to snatch it back! Malleson writes : "Something remained to be effected even in the city itself. The Moulvie, the most obstinate of the rebel leaders, had returned to Lucknow; he was still there, at Shahdat Ganj, in its very heart, occupying, with two guns, a strongly fortified building whence he bade defiance to the British. To dislodge him, Lugard was detached, on the 21st , with a portion of the division which had conquered the Begum Kothi, the first day of the attack. The troops employed were the 93rd Highlanders and the 4th Panjab Rifles. Seldom did the rebels display so much pertinacity and resolution as on this occasion. They defended themselves most bravely and were not driven out until they had killed several men and severely wounded many others on our side."36 
When the heroic impulse of this struggle and those who carried it on had calmed down, they left that the flag of Swaraj for which they were fighting, was no more at Lucknow but that it was awaiting their uplifted swords in the wilds of Hindusthan. So, they moved away from the building. The enemy pursued them for six miles. But the Moulview again effected his escape. 
36 Kaye and Malleson, Vol. IV, page 286 That was the last fight of Lucknow! 
Now, Lucknow had completely fallen into the hands of the English. One must really dip one’s pen in blood to write the history of the vengeance that they wreaked on Lucknow! How the palace and the city were looted, how the citizens were massacred wholesale, how even dead bodies were insulted is a sad, sad story to tell. If, while reading the description of the atrocities given by men like Russell, we bear in mind that this description is given by Englishmen, we would be able to have some faint notion of the terrible vengeance that was taken by the English. How different was the conduct of the Revolutionaries! We give below two extracts, both from English writers, so that the reader might judge for himself the difference between Indian and English vengeance. 
In the prisons at Lucknow, there were several English women and officers. For six months, their lives were spared. But when the English army entered the city at the first onslaught of Sir Colin, massacring all - innocent and guilty alike, the angered Revolutionaries went to the palace and wanted to take vengeance on some of the English prisoners. Accordingly, Lieutenant Orr, Sir Mount Stuart, and five or six other Englishmen were given over and they were immeidately shot down. But when they insisted that the English women-prisoners also should be killed, "to the honour of womanhood, the demand was imperatively refused by the Begum so far as the females were concerned, and they were immediately taken under her care in the Zenana of the palace."37 
We give below, for comparison and contrast, one or two examples of the vengeance of the English. These have been given by Russell himself, the famous correspodent of the London Times. "While the massacre was going on in the palace, a frightened child was leading an old man. The old man came before the English authorities and, prostrating himself before them, asked that their lives should be spared. As if in answer to this wailing 
37 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 94. 
request the English officer took out his pistol and shot him on the temple! Again, he pressed the trigger but the shot missed. He pressed again but the shot again refused to kill the innocent boy. The fourth time – thrice he had time to repent – the gallant officer succeeded and the boy’s life-blood flowed at his feet!”38 
This incident has came out, because there was someone who would write about it. Many an other incident has not come to light, because there was no pen to record these. These atrocities were going on to such an extent that distinctions were actually drawn up between a merciful death and a cruel death! A murder, such as the one above, was a merciful death. The 
cruel death which rendered even cold-blooded murder merciful meant something like the following : "Some of the Sepoys were still alive and they were mercifully killed; but one of their number was dragged out to the sandy plain outside the house; he was pulled by his legs to a convenient place, where he was held down, pricked in the face and body by the bayonets of some of the soldiery, while others collected fuel for a small pyre; and when everything was ready - the man was roasted alive! These were Englishmen, and more than one officer saw it; no one offered to interfere! The horrors of this infernal cruelty were aggravated by the attempt of the miserable wretch to escape when half-burned to death. By a sudden effort he leaped away and, with the flesh of his body handing from his bones, ran for a few yards ere he was caught, brought back, put on the fire again, and held there by bayonets, till his remains were consumed!"39 
* * * 
Delhi has fallen. Lucknow, too, has fallen. But the War of Independence did not flag. Seeing this unexpected result, the English were 
38 Russell’s Diary, page 384. 
39 Russell's Diary, page 302. 
convinced fully that they had made a mistake in imagining that this Revolution was caused by the Sepoys and only for one or two grievances. This was no mutiny, it was a War of Independence! One or two grievances are not responsible for this rising, but political slavery, the source of all the innumerable grievances suffered - that along was the cause. The selfishness of personal gain lay not at its root, but the sacred flame of liberty, the glorious ideal of Swaraj and Swadharma, it is these that were burning there. Not only had the Sepoy risen to give his life’s blood with almost selfish eagerness to this sacred principles of Liberty, but the whole civil population all over the country, from villages as much as from towns, had also risen. Without that, this strength, this resolution, this selfishness, this grit would not have been displayed. For, Lord Canning had now issued a proclamation that those who would join the Revolution thereafter would see their lands and estates.confiscated, while those who surrendered at once would be forgiven. Yet the Revolutionary would not lay down his sword. Still Oudh persisted in her fight. Lucknow had fallen. But, Sepoy and shopkeeper, Brahmin and Moulvie, Rajas, Zemindars, and Talukdars, villagers and agriculturists – all Oudh was still making a rush forward! Dr.Duff writes about this terrible popular rising: “Why, if it had been a merely military 
mutiny, in the midst of an unsympathetic, unaiding population, a few decisive victories, such as we have already had, might quash it or, as the phrase goes, stamp it out. But so far frombeing quashed or stamped out, it seems still as rampant and in some respects, more wide-spread and formidable than ever. And, it is a fact that it is not a mere military revolt, but a rebellion - a revolution, which alone can account for the little progress hitherto made in extinguishing it and, at the same time, precludes any reasonable hope of its early suppression. That it is a rebellion, and a rebellion, too, of no recent or mushroom growth, every fresh revelation tends more and more to confirm. And a rebellion, long and deliberately concocted, a rebellion which had been able to carry the Hindu and Mahomedan in an unnatural confederacy, a rebellion which is now 
manifestly nurtured and sustained by the whole population of Oudh and, directly or indirectly, sympathised with and assisted by well-nigh half of the neighbouring provinces - is not to be put down by a few victories over mutinous Sepoys, however decisive and brilliant. 
"From the very outset, it has been gradually assuming more and more the character of a rebellion - a rebellion on the part of vast multitudes beyond the Sepoy army, against British supremacy and sovereignty. Out real mutinous Sepoys. Had we only Sepoys for our foes, the country might soon have been pacified. 
"Never has the enemy been met without being routed, scattered, and his guns taken. But, though constantly beaten, he evermore rallies and appears again, ready for a fresh encounter. No sooner is one city taken or relieved than some other one is threatened. No sooner is one district pronounced safe through the influx of British troops than another is disturbed and convulsed. No sooner is a highway reopened between places of importance than it is again closed and all communication is for a season cut off. No sooner are the mutineers scored out of one locality than they reappear with double or treble force in another locality. No sooner does a moveable column force its way through hostile ranks than these reoccupy the territory behind it. All gaps in the number of the foe seem to be instantaneously filled up and no permanent clearance or impression seems to be made anywhere. The passage of our brave little armies through these swarming myriads, instead of leaving the deep traces of a mighty ploughshare through a roughened field, seems more to resemble that of the eagle through the elastic air or a stately vessel through the unfurrowed ocean!"40 
The truth described so picturesquely by Duff was realised by the English only at the end; but every individual of the Panday party had 
40 Dr.Duff’s Indian Rebellion, pages 241-243. 
thoroughly realised it long, long before. Those who died on the field for their country and their king were, of course, giving expression to such thoughts; but, even their women showed an equal determination. When the "brave" English attacked the Zenana of Lucknow, some Zenana ladies fell into their hands. Feringhi soldiers opened fire as soon as the door was forced and some of these ladies were killed! Those who survived were put in prison. Lucknow city was soon razed to the ground. The English were overjoyed at the prospect, as they thought, of the early surrender of the Revolutionaries. The jailors of these Ranees, sharing to the full the general feeling of joy of their compatriots, asked them mockingly, "Do not you think that the struggle has come to an end?" "On the contrary", replied the Ranees, "we are sure that in the long run you will be beaten."41 
41 Narrative of the Indian Mutiny, page 338. Russell's Diary, page 400. 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-VIII 
KUMAR SINGH AND AMAR SINGH 
HUNTED out of the valleys of Jagadishpur by General Eyre, Kumar Singh, the old but energetic lion of the territory of Shahabad was roaming restlessly but always on the alert for every chance to spring at the neck of those who had deprived him of his liberty. Under his banner had united his brother Amar Singh and two other chiefs, Nisswar Singh and Jawan Singh. They were now lying in wait in the forests. With them were their beloved wives, heroic women, but ready to join in the fight, combing their hair not with the delicate combs of the Zenana but with sharp arrows, flourishing in their delicately fashioned hands, "tenderer than the very flower," the flashing Damascus blade, "harder than adamant." They were, also, waiting to drink the blood of the enemy! To drink the blood of the enemy, we say again; for, old as Kumar Singh was and proudly insolent as his opponent was, the ambition of Kumar Singh was nothing short of drinking the enemy's blood! For, though "reduced to extremities with hunger, besieged by age, - a picture of hard misery, with no position, and courting death," as the lion of the famous poem, our Kumar was still the king of the forest! And, therefore, whatever the reverses, how would he eat the dead grass of slavery? His ambition was - one ambition alone could be the ambition of the lion of the poem referred to - to break open, with his steel-claws, the skull of the elephant! 
With the land belonging to his family for generations as far as your memory could go now usurped by the stranger with his very palace of Jagadishpur in the hands of the foreigner, and his temples and images pulled down by the desecrating hands of the enemy, Kumar Singh did not show any excitement. He did not make a dash for Jagadishpur, nor did he persist in holding Shahabad. His capital was strictly guarded by the English and his army was small - only a thousand and two hundred Sepoys and five hundred untrained volunteers. He did not show, therefore, the least anxiety to recover his capital immediately. But his great desire was to hold aloft the bright golden banner of the War of Independence! The very day that he gave up Jagadishpur without serious resistance - that very day he had made up his mind to take to a different mode of warfare altogether. That mode of warfare is the one mode that goes farthest to secure success in any War of Independence. It is guerilla warfare. 
Therefore, enraged as he was at the loss of his capital, Kumar Singh sent not his army against the enemy, for then his soldiers would have perished like moths before the rushing enemy; but he moved quietly into the forests of West Behar and along the river Shon, carefully nothing the weak points of the enemy. In the meanwhile, news reached him that troops, Nepalese and English, were being sent from Azimgarh into Oudh to destroy Lucknow. As soon as with his keen scent he scented the prey, the lion of Jagadishpur took one leap out of the forest. Unlike those who would still, in fallen days, hover round their capital without the least chance, and unlike those weak persons who give way completely to passion and emotion to console themselves, our Kumar Singh was the very genius of guerilla warfare. Though the British army was marching on to Lucknow, they still had an eye on Jagadishpur, where his activities might be expected to be centred. Kumar Singh, therefore, postponed indefinitely his operations there and started for eastern Oudh, to make one spring for that part where the British army was weakest, hoping to surprise Azimgarh by uniting together all the revolutionaries that were scattered in eastern Oudh, and then to make a dash, if victorious, on Benares or even Allahabad and, thus, to avenge the Jagadishpur insult. On the 18th of March 1858, even the Revolutionaries of Beeva joined him; and the united armies encamped near the fort in Atrolia. 
Azimgarh is twenty - five miles' run from Atrolia. Learning that Kumar Singh was so near, Milman marched on Atrolia with three hundred infantry and horse and two guns. Before the morning rays of the sun of the 22nd of March had lighted the field of Atrolia, the vanguards of Milman and of the Revolutionaries were within sight of each other. Milman gave them not even a moment's time to recover themselves, taken aback as they seemed to be by the sudden appearance of the British troops. He began the fight at once. But, of course, how long could the Revolutionaries fight against the British? They were soon totally defeated. What an ending to the vainglorious boast of Kumar Singh! All glory to the British army which showed such fine front even after the all-night march of the previous day. Ye have earned your breakfast, British soldiers, by the sweat of your brow, nay, by the free flow of blood from your bodies; so, enjoy your breakfast, with your commanders, in the cool share of the mango groved! The rays of the morning sun are welcoming you, gay because of the great victory earned so lately. Arms were arranged all around, breakfast was ready, the hungry mouths were chewing the first morsel; the cups of drink were filled ready, - and then! 
Boom, boom! What is up? The cups are dashed down from the lips, the morsels of food have slipped off the mouths, the breakfast dishes are shattered and, instead the army has to take up the arms only this hour laid down with a sense of relief! Has Kumar Singh come after all? Yes, yes! Kumar Singh has descended like a thunderbolt upon the English, who had been contemplating with delight their supposed victory. As soon as Milman was completely enticed into the security of a false victory, the hero - old in age but youthful in spirit – came out of the fort of Atrolia and smiled with contempt at the prey, now completely his. Malleson says: "What more could a general long for? Everything was in his favour. Kumar Singh, then, marched to a victory which he deemed assured. The imagination can almost picture him making to the confidant by his side an exclamation near akin to that which burst from the lips of Wellington when he noticed the false 
movement of Marmont which brought on the battle of Salamanca! Mon cher Alva, Marmont est perdu!"42 Still Milman struggled to escape and marched on with bondness, hoping to frighten Kumar Singh by keeping up a good and steady attack. But a regular shower of bullets was kept on from the avenues of sugarcane, from the trees of the mango grove, and from the mud—banks everywhere. The army of Kumar Singh numbered five on six times that the Milman and, seeing that his enemy threatened to surround him completely, Milman was obliged to stop weakly in the midst of his hold attack. This weakness increased the determination of Kumar Singh to surround him. Now the British army, frightened and almost suffocated, began to fall back. Now began the wolf-like warfare of Kumar Singh's troops, moving forward to shoot at stray soldiers and the flanks of the enemy. The temporary triumph did not turn Kumar Singh's head. He did not attack unitedly the retreating troops of the enemy; for, he knew well the nature of the troops under him. He could not be sure how long they would have held on in a hand to hand fight. Hence, shrewd as he was, he determined only to continue the guerilla tactics. He drove the army of the enemy, hunting them from Atrolia straight to their camp at Kosilla. 
But the British army was destined not to get a safe refuge even in the Kosilla camp. Already the news of the defeat of the army had reached there and the Indian servants had left with their oxen and everything else that was in their keeping. No servants ahead, no provisions near, with Kumar Singh's army preying on the stray unfortunates like wolves, Milman began his retreat leaving the camp behind him. Kumar Singh pursued - pursued even after he had taken complete possession of everything the enemy had, and hunted the British army and the miserable Milman from Kosilla right up to Azimgarh. At Azimgarh, Milman’s hopes revived again! For, there he had aid of three hundred and fifty fresh forces from Benares and Ghazipur, who had come in response to his express message. Colonel 
42 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, p. 319 
Dames was the commander of the united forces. With a strong base like Azimgarh, with the British army reinforced to double the former number, with Colonel Dames to lead them – they determined to take revenge for the temporary defeat, come what might! 
So Colonel Dames set out from Azimgarh resolving to revenge himself on Kumar Singh on the 28th of March. He thought he had his revenge, for he was victorious over Kumar Singh; but it was only to find the old game repeated again, perhaps better than before. The fresh soldiers with their fresh commander got such a sound bearing that Colonel Dames ran from the field right to Azimgarh and took refuge within the fortifications of the city. No one now 
even spoke of attacking Kumar afresh. Kumar now entered Azimgarh and leaving the work of annihilating the few Englishmen in the fortifications to a few of his followers - and to famine - he pushed on triumphant to Benares! 
The governor-general who, as we have said before, was now at Allahabad, was filled with terror, now that the lion had opened wide his jaws. "Knowing what sort of a man Kumar Singh was, that he possessed audacity and courage, and that he knew the value of time in military operations, Lord Canning realised at once the danger of the situation."43 He who had just imprisoned the English forces at Azimgarh and, having marched with wonderful rapidity the eighty-one miles of the way, had threatened to cut off Allahabad from Calcutta by attacking the city of Benares, he - the Rana Kumar Singh, reinforced as he now was by the Sepoys flying away after the defeat at Lucknow and knowing full well the art of keeping together and in discipline even such demoralised forces as he had, was not to be lightly treated by Lord Canning. It was owing to the firm grip on the cities of Allahabad and Benares which the English could maintain through the loyalty of the Sikhs in the first part of the mutiny, that 
43 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 321. . 
the rebellion was nipped in the bug in the provinces round Calcutta; and when it seemed the design of Kumar Singh to catch again the lost opportunity by dashing on Benares and Allahabad, Lord Canning ordered Lord Mark Kerr himself to march on this 'rebel' chief in all haste. 
Lord Mark Kerr, well known in the Crimean campaigns and well experienced in Indian military matters, marched off at once with five hundred men and eight guns and arrived within eight miles of Azimgarh. After a little rest, he started onwards on the morning of the 6th of April. At about six o’clock in the morning, he learnt that Kumar Singh’s men had been watching his progress. But pretending ignorance of this fact, he ordered his army to advance in readiness and at once commenced the attack on Kumar’s left flank. No sooner did the English commence the attack than Kumar’s left began a veritable shower of bullets on the enemy. On that day, the old Kumar was seen fighting lightning-like in the thick of the battle, seated on his favourite white horse. Knowing full well that the strength of his army was not so much in their number which was simply swelled as a threat to the enemy by allowing all sorts of camp-followers to enter the fighting ranks, Kumar Singh solely relied upon his own skill and courage and intrepidity. 
He spread out his force to attack Lord Mark Kerr on his flanks. The guns of the enemy were vomiting fire upon him and he had no guns to silence them, still did he succeed in bringing his army right to the rear of Lord Mark! This movement upset the plan of the enemy so totally that their guns had to fall back; and this was the signal for the Revolutionaries to rush forward with a triumphant war-cry. Kumar Singh had, by this time, tightened his grip on the English rear so firmly that the English elephants began to run amock, the conductors on them lost all hope of life and clung round their necks with both hands, and the servants and all began to run wheresoever they found a way. Yet Mark Kerr said "Let us hold on for a while - victory might still be ours!" He had captured some houses on the Revolutionaries' front, while they had totally routed his rear.Thus was this 
strange battle fought. In the beginning, the front of Kumar was opposed to the front of the English army and now the rear of the British army is opposed to the front of Kumar; now he has even set the rear of the enemy on fire! When Mark Kerr saw the rear surrounded in flames of fire, he dedtermined to leave the battlefield and began to press on to Azimgarh. For, if not victory, at least the secondary purpose of carrying succour to Azimgarh should be accomplished if possible. His guns did him a splendid service, specially as Kumar Singh had none with him. At midnight, Lord Mark brought his army to Azimgarh. About this battle and the strategic movements and errors of Kumar Singh and the difficulties under which he laboured, Malleson says :- "That leader had showed himself greater as a strategist than a tactician. His plan of campaign was admirable but, in carrying it into execution, he committed many serious errors. Milman gave him a great, an unexpected opportunity. He had that officer at his mercy. When Milman's men were waiting for their breakfast in the mango grove near Atrolia, it was in the power of Kumar Singh to cut them off from Azimgarh. He preferred to attack them in front. Then, when he had forced him to fall back, he did not press the pursuit with sufficient vigour. A capable commander would still have cut them off. Once having seen them housed in Azimgarh, he should have left a portion of his force to blockade them, pressed on with the remainder towards Benares, and occupied a position in which he could have engaged Lord Mark Kerr with advantage. He had at his disposal, it subsequently transpired, about twelve thousand men. To oppose these the few men led by Lord Mark were alone available. Everything was within his grasp had he dared to stretch out his hand. The chances are that, capable man as he was, he saw all this. But he was not supreme master of the situation. Every petty leader who had brought his contingent to serve under him wished to dictate a programme. The counsels of the rebels tended, then, almost always to a compromise."44 
44 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, pages 326-327. 
But Lord Mark Kerr was baulked not only of his victory but even of this secondary purpose of relieving Azimgarh. For still the whole city was in the hands of the Revolutionaries who had also a perfect hold of the whole surrounding province. A born commander is he who knows exactly the nature and capacities of his forces. Few men could have excelled Kumar Singh in this necessary quality of a commander. As he had correctly gauged the power and strength of his enemy, even so he measured the merits and demerits of his own followers. Therefore is it that he did not try at all to attack and carry the fortress in which the English had taken refuge. He had closely observed the fact that the Sepoys, for whatever reasons or panic it might be, were ready to undergo any other ordeal but that of facing the English bayonets - a fact which had been clearly demonstrated in both the sieges of Arrah and Lucknow. Therefore, having rendered it difficult for the English forces to come out of the besieged fortress, he began to plan in his daring heart quite another scheme of worsting his enemy. In the forces of the Revolutionaries that had entered the field in 1857, it was clearly seen that there were men of two different temperaments - the one class, who would throw themselves right in the jaws of death with unflinching and firm and disciplined resistance on the battle-field, whether opposed to the cannon or the bayonet of the foe; the other who, possessing the will to die for the nation but lacking in the courage to carry it into effect, would flinch back and get routed at the very moment when they ought to have stood unmoved. Out of these two sorts of men, Kumar Singh collected those who belonged to the 
first sort and had proved immovable in the field, and organised them into a separate band of chosen veterans. Having made this selection and created a body on whom he could depend for any adventure however difficult, Kumar Singh became ready to put into execution the daring scheme which he had set his heart upon, and ordered his newly selected veteran band to stand on the bridge of the Tanu river. 
For, it was by this little bridge that a British general, named Lugard, was marching ahead to relieve the English forces at Azimgarh. Lugard first, and most naturally, thought that the object of this Revolutionary band in contesting the passage of the bridge was simply to preserve the grip of the Revolutionaries on the city of Azimgarh. “But”, says Malleson, “the wily chieftain had matured plans far deeper than even those about him could fathom.” This unfathomable plan of the wily chieftain was to deceive the enemy by a false show of holding 
Azimgarh at any cost, to fix their whole attention there on that spot and, while they were thus completely beguiled there, to march off straight on to Jagadishpur. This scheme was matchless in its military widsom. To march off from Azimgarh to Ghazipur, thence to jump into the Ganges, to cross it, to press on, and to reconquer Jagadishpur - all this in spite of the pursuing force of Lugard at the rear and in the face of the deluded English force of Arrah in front! It was for the execution of this very bold plan that he ordered his veteran band to guard the bridge of the river Tanu. His orders to those veterans were to hold the bridge against the attacks of Lugard till the other division of his forces had time to leave Azimgarh and escaping the vigilance of the English, to take the road leading to Ghazipur. If once he reached Ghazipur and crossed the Ganges, the lion would be back again into his native forests of Jagadishpur, and the English must re-enact the whole drama right anew, as all that they had done during the previous twelve months would be as if not done at all. 
But to succeed in all these plans depends upon your bravery, O soldiers on the bridge of the Tanu! You must not allow the British forces under Lugard to step upon this bridge till the whole army of Kumar Singhhas gone out of the range of the enemy's sight! You have been selected by your chief in the brief that you alone would rise equal to the occasion. May your bravery not belie his confidence! Let one thought, one determination, one vow alone be yours, namely, not to let the enemy capture this bridge till Kumar Singh had led off in safety his whole force out of the 
sight of the duped enemy! As Baji Deshpande, the Mahratta soldier, held out in the famous gorge of Pavankhind till Shri Shivaji could reach the fort of Rangana in safety, even so fight on hard and hot till Kumar's order is carried out to the letter, his forces saves and his confidence vindicated! Lugard, too led assaults after assaults on his handful of the Revolutionary band as often as Fazul did against the Mahratta, but he could not gain a foot-hold on the bridge even for a second. Every charge of the English was firmly and vigorously repulsed by the Revolutionary forces who were defending it. Till Kumar Singh signalled to them his safe departure from Azimgarh and his successful march on the way to Ghazipur, the veteran band held this bridge, contesting it inch by inch! Col. Malleson says, "They held the bridge of boats with a resolution and perseverence worthy of veterans, and it was not until they had by their long residence ensured the safety of their comrades, that they fell back."45 Thus, the brave band accomplished its mission, fell back with perfect order, and, as settled, succeeded in rejoining their chief, Raja Kumar Singh. 
Seeing the suggen evacuation of the bridge, Lugard rushed on, but found, to his utter dismay, the magic-like disappearance of the whole army of Kumar Singh, as if it never was there! So to pursue and find out this invisible force, he despatched a detachment of European cavalry and a horse battery. Twelve miles did they gallop on; yet, Kumar singh could not be found - and when found at last, he was found in such a strong position as to make it impossible to distinguish who was the pursuer and who the pursued! It was not the Revolutionaries who were frightened at the sight of the foe but it was the English forces who seemed to have lost their balance at the sight of the Revolutionaries. Kumar Singh's army was drawn up in battle array, with their swords unsheathed and with their guns pointed at the enemy. One of the English officers engaged in this fight says, "It was all we could do to hold our own against such odds. Immediately our cavalry 
45 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 330. 
charged, they stood and formed square and used to abuse and tell us to come on." And, when the English did go on, they received them with such a hot welcome that many soldiers and even officers on the side of the English fell dead. The squares of Kumar's forces remained impenetrable, and the English were completely thrown on the defensive. After this engagement, Kumar Singh pursued his march and was approaching nearer and nearer to the banks of the Ganges! 
News of the ill-success of the English pursuing force reached Azimgarh. The British general, Douglas, started with five or six more guns and came to their aid. Douglas had already tasted the sharpness of Kumar's sword, and so he came on with circumspect steps as far as the 
village Naghai, in pursuit of the Raja. There also the Raja was quite ready. When the forces were within striking distance, Kumar Singh led on his veteran band to face the foe and again ordered them to fight on till the signal should come, and, dividing the remaining forces into two parts, he despatched them onwards by two different routes to the banks of the Ganges. While these movements were secretly being carried out, the veteram band kept up a vigorous fight with the enemy, in spite of the lack of gund to reply to the hot fire of the enemy’s artillery which was mowing them down like grass. They wavered not, nor did their ranks break up, nor did their charge flag in the least! For our miles this living battle pressed on! At last, when the army of the enemy showed signs of exhaustion, the two divisions of Kumar Sing’s army, until now going by different routes, united together and the whole force marched unhampered, and Raja Kumar Singh was again marching nearer and nearer towards the banks of the Ganges! This exhausted British force passed the night of the 17th of April near the village of Athusi. Early in the morning, Douglas, thinking he had given no start to the Revolutionary forces, ordered a march again - only to find that Kumar Singh was already thirteen miles ahead to him. The whole of the British horse and the British artillery had been pursuing Kumar Singh; but, as the British infantry, through total exhaustion, were unable to proceed further, they were given rest for another night. The scouts of Kumar Singh were matchless in bringing him all detailed information about the enemy's plans and whereabouts. They did not fail to inform him of their exhausted condition. At this, the old general stood up, determined to take full advantage of this chance and, with his force, the octogenarian chief recommenced the march in the midnight and came straightway to Sikandarpur, reached the river Ghogra, crossed it, and entered the province of Ghazipur. He presseed on right up to the village of Manohar, and there ordered a temporary rest to the now tired, worn-out, and hungry forces which had so bravely responded to the intrepid will of their patriotic chief. It was humanly impossible to avoid stopping here, though Kumar Singh knew full well that the poosition was rather a weak one. When Doughlas heard that Kumar had gained a start over him, he started in hot pursuit and eventually reached Manohar soon after Kumar Singh. He began the attack immediately and, as the Revolutionaries were tired on account of their long and continuous marching, their stand was feeble and they lost the battle, losing also many elephants and ammunition and food supplies. But Kumar Singh's heart and will remained as much unconquered and unconquerable as ever. For, no sooner he was the signs of a crushing defeat than he put into execution the same tactics that he had hitherto been pursuing. He divided his troops into small bands and, as each division effected its retreat from the losing battle-field by a different route, the pursuit of the enemy was frustrated. Kumar had given the captains of the different bands definite instructions to meet at a pre-arranged place at a fixed hour, and lo, when the hour struck, Kumar Singh's forced had come together and were ready for their march. This place where they met was so completely hidden from the enemy that the victory of the English was altogether barren of any result, and so the English commander had to stop at the village of Manohar itself to ascertain the whereabouts of Kumar Singh's army, while Kumar Singh and his forces were all the while marching nearer and nearer to the banks of the Ganges! 
Nearer and nearer to the banks of the Ganges! Nay, now, he has won the terrible race and actually reached the banks of the Ganges. The English forces were also close upon his rear. But, as his forces were now greatly reduced, he decided that it was not wise to fight the enemy and so he now pursued quite diffeent tactics. He spread a rumour all over the province that, owing to the scarcity of boats, his forces were going to cross the Ganges on the baks of 
elephants somewhere near a place called Balita. The English scouts brought the news to the general who must have felt triumphant of the efficiency of his intelligence department! How can now this rebel chief succeed in crossing the Ganges when my scouts have enabled me to know the exact place where he intends to cross the river? - He is doomed to be drowned along with his elephants! So, the British general, with his white forces, went to Balila and kept himself in concealment, elephants of Kumar Singh as soon as they would appear. Brave soldiers! Enjoying all the while the sweet prospects of success, conceal yourself near Balila till the looked for enemy comes! There, seven miles below this very spot, is Kumar Singhh actually crossing the river Ganges! Having duped the English by the story of the elephants and Balila, the Raja got together as many boats as he wanted and, from the Ghat of Shivapur, he began to the scaret Bhagirathi at night.The duped foe, awaked to this fact, got extremely irritated and, hurriedly marching from Balila, reached Shivapur and even succeeded in capturing a boat belonging to Raja - but that was the last boat! The whole army had already been sent on the other side and in a minute or two the chieftain too, having supervised the crossing of the army, would have crossed the river himself. But, alas! What a calamity this one moment has brought with it! While this hero of the nation, the pride of chivalry, the sword of Liberty - Rana Kumar Singh was in the middle of the stream, a bullet shot from the enemy's gun entered his wrist! But old as he was, the octogenarian leader did not mind it at all! And when amputation was deemed necessary, with his own hand - the hand that was not wounded - Kumar Singh unsheathed his 
sword, lopped off the wounded arm at the elbow, and threw it into the sacred Ganges saying, "Accept thou, Mother, this last sacrifice of a loving son!" 
Though innumerable are the people who have addressed the Ganges as Mother, it is Kumar - this brave son of Ganga, and such as he, that make the motherhood of the sacred Ganges fruitful and glorious. As the poet says, innumerable are the stars that are in the sky; but, it is the moon alone that adorns it and makes it lovely! 
After offering this sacrifice to the Mother Ganges, this distinguished son succeeded in crossing the river without further trouble from the English army. The enemy, on the other hand, like a hunter whose prey is escaped out of his reach, unable to cross the river, stopped there with their pride wounded and mission unaccomplished. The lion, now triumphant by freeing itself from the hunter's nets and lances, again rushed into his native forests of Shahabad, came to Jagadishpur and, on the 22nd of April, re-entered this his old capital. It was from this capital that he was hunted out eight months back. Once more now, in the palace of 
Jagadishpur is ruling the prince of Jagadishpur. His brother, Amar Singh, who had collected together a force of patriotic peasants and villagers even before Kumar Singh had crossed the Ganges, now joined him. The brave Kumar ordered out in divisions these united forces to guard the capital on all sides, while he too, as intrepid and unexhausted as ever, took again to warfare. 
The entrance into Jagadishpur was so sudden and dashing that the British forces at Arrah which had been kept there for the express purpose of watching Jagadishpur had no notice of Kumar Singh's descent on Arrah. Thus outwitted, Le Grand, the British general at Arrah, became wild at the discovery of this his enemy's triumph. What audacity that this rebel chief should give the slip to all the British forces in East Oudh, should enter 
Jagadishpur, and even begin to rule with all the pomp of an independent prince here, under the very nose of the British general? It is not even eight months since Sir Eyre had chased this rebel out of these forests; - well, even like that will this Le Grand rush in the Jagadishpur wilds to hunt down this marauding chief. With this hope, the brave general, with four hundred British troops and two guns, marched on the doomed city of Jagadishpur on the 23rd of April. How, now, is it possible that this field should be contested by Kumar Singh? During all these months, the old warrior had been fighting incessantly and without a moment's rest; his forces had never been able to snatch a hearty meal or an undisturbed sleep; but yesterday had he come to Jagadishpur after the death-dealing struggle in East Oudh, and he and his forces had not even taken one day's rest. According to the English official report itself his forces were "disjointed, badly armed, and without guns," numbering at the most to a thousand, with very few trained soldiers amongst them, and the octogenarian chief himself was founded mortally in his hand! Against this army was marching the fresh, the vigorous, the disciplined forces of the British, well armed with guns and led by General Le Grand. The issue of the battle was, then, a foregone conclusion! And with this full confidence, the English army entered the forest which was about one mile and a half from the town. The English guns began to thunder forth unchallenged, for Kumar Singh had no guns to oppose them. But, still, it seems that he means to smother us in this thickly grown jungle by stretching out his forces round us; - well then, let the all unfailing stroke be given. Let that straight and bold front attack of the Europeans, which had always been the terror of the Asiatics, be ordered! It was ordered; the Europeans rushed forth irresistible; the army of Kumar Singh, too, began to contest; and none knows how, but in a moment, the brave Briton got confused and struck with terror and sounded the retreat. But, though the bands sounded the retreat, as Kumar Singh held the British force in his grip, it was more dangerous to attempt a treat than even to try to make a stand. But, if retreat is as ruinous as a stand, then, O brave Briton, why not make a stand to prove that unflinching courage of your people which so many times you have boasted 
that you possess? Matters not whether it is proved or disproved, he along lived who ran! And they did; all the British forces, like hunted deer, left the jungle and began to fly wherever the way led, while Kumar Singh's army pursued them hot and the rout was complete! One of the men who himself was present in this rout, writes to this effect of his experience, in a letter written at the time: - "Indeed, it makes me extremely ashamed to write what followed. We began flying out of the jungles, leaving the battle-field and being constantly beaten by the enemy. Our people, dying of thirst, rushed forth at the sight of a wretched, dirty pool of water, in the most confused manner possible. Just then, the horses of Kumar Singh closed upon our rear. Henceforth, there was no limit to our disgrace, and the disaster was complete. No sense of shame was left in any one of us. Everyman ran wherever he thought his safety lay. Orders were thrown to the winds. Discipline and drill were dead. In all directions, nothing could be heard but sighs, curses and wailings. Bands of Europeans dropped dead in the flight by sunstroke. Nor was it possible to ask for medicine; for, the dispensary was already captured by Kumar Singh. Some died there and then; the rest cut down by the enemy; the carriers dropped the dolis and fled; all was confusion - all terror! Sixteen elephants were all full- laden with the burden of the wounder. General Le Grand himself was shot dead by a bullet in his breast! Soldiers running for their lives for five miles and more had now no strength, even for lifting up their guns. The Sikhs, accustomed to the heat of the sun, took off the elephants and fled away ahead of all. None would be with the white. Out of a hundred and ninety-nine whites, about eighty alone could survive this terrible massacre! We were led into this jungle like cattle into the slaughter-house, simply to be killed!"46 
The forces of Kumar Singh were thus completely successful. They had in spite of the fact that they had no artillery to speak of on their side, routed the British forces with a terrible loss and slaughter, and had 
46 Charles Ball's Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 288. 
captured even the two guns which the British had so proudly brought.47But, one fact is most significant in this pursuit; the number of Sikhs that fell on that day was only nine. It substantiates most thoroughly the tradition that Kumar Singh was in the habit of issuing strict injunctions to spare as many lives as could be spared of the Indian people even though they were on the enemy's side, while there should be no mistaken mercy shown to the foreigh foe. In the first outbreak of the Revolution many of the Babus of Bengal were made prisoners, for joining the English side, by Kumar's men; but he not only released them but sent them without harm on elephants to the city of Patna where they wished to go. When the 
Sepoys determined to burn down all government papers written in English, it was Kumar who stopped them from doing so, as "otherwise, after the English were driven out of the country, there would be no proof of the rights of the people, and no evidence to determine the amount due from one party to the other. 
Having vanquished his foe thus completely and thoroughly, the old chief, Rana Kumar Singh, entered again his palace of Jagadishpur on the 23rd of April, crowned with fresh laurels and a fresh fame! 
This was his last entrance, for no more will Kumar Sing re-enter on the stage of the world. The wound caused by the amputation of his hand proved mortal and, on the 26th day of April, the third day after his latest victory, the great Rana died in his own palace. He died on an independent throne and under the flag of freedom. The day he died, it was not the Union Jack of the British Isles but the Golden Banner of a free and liberated nation, the triumphant symbol of his Desh and Dharma, that was waving radiant over the palace of Jagadishpur. It was under the cool shade of this banner that he died. What nobler death can a Rajpur long for? 
47 "The English sustained on this occasion a complete defect of the worst kind." White's 
History of the Mutiny. 
He had avenged his wrongs; he had, with poor means, worsted a mighty foe more than once in a fair battle-field; he had not proved a traitor to the nation nor a renegade to his Dharma but had broken the chains that bound his land and made her free so far as one man could do it, and to-day, in a noble field, he had been crowned by Victory’s own hands with a wreath of laurels. Then, this is the auspicious day : this is the supreme moment for you, O great Rajput, to close your eyes for ever, to lay down your body – not through disease, but even as a worthy sacrifice to the cause of your mother’s freedom, by the wounds received on the battle-field! Let your death be as noble and as matchless as was your life! 
He died on that day and under the banner of a free people. What nobler death can a Rajput wish for?48 
The personality of Shrimant Kumar Singh is striking in more than one respect. His personal dash and high character had naturally infused in his army the two indispensable virtues of discipline and bravery. It is rarely the case that persons who are called upon to lead a nation's regeneration are in their private morals as unimpeachable as they are unchallengeable in their public ability. This rare consistency of character was conspicuous in great degree in the life of this great Indian. Such was the influence of his pure conduct on his people that none would dare even to smoke openly in their verandahs for fear of being seen by him. Amongst all the leaders of the Revolutionaries in 1857, there was none who could surpass Kumar Singh in military ability. It was he who at once grasped trhe utility of guerilla warfare in the War of Independence and it was he alone who could imitate the masterful tactics of a veteran guerilla leader like Shivaji. If we compare the two great generals that 1857 brought to the front, Tatia Tope and Kumar Singh, in their military achievements as guerilla leaders, we shall be struck with one distinguishing point. To Tatia Tope may 
48 The English historian, Holmes, says : “The old Rajput who had fought so honourably and so bravely against the British power died on April 26, 1858.” – History of the Sepoy War. 
be at once assigned a very high place in the negative side of guerilla warfare, while Kumar Singh holds the position with equal eminence in the positive as well as in the negative side of it. Tatia Tope did not allow the enemy to completely crush his forces or his power to raise them, but Kumar Singh, while succeeding in 
doing this, could even succeed in crushing the enemy’s forces by severe defeats. To ensure ultimate success, it is imperatively necessary in guerilla warfare to prevent the demonstration of one’s followers which the constant flights from the field or avoidance of battles against a mightier foe do inevitably tend to beget. The defeats which are suffered intentionally by the leader, and the flights which he finds it necessary to effect, ought not to be allowed to create demoralisation or diffidence in the minds of his followers. The constant avoidance of battles ought not to be allowed to create in the followers a fear for battle itself. The skilful avoidance of a battle and a panic-stricken flight in the course of the battle are two very different things. So it is most important in guerilla tactics never to leave the field through cowardice; but whenever a battle is decided to be given, it sould be given so sternly and dashingly as to strike a sudden terror into the heart of the enemy and to infuse an overwhelming confidence into the heart of one’s own followers. The main skill lies in taking care never to be forced to give battle where the chances are of an unequal contest. But once the die is cast, such must be the tenacity and desperation in contesting the field as was shown by Baji in the Pawankhind or by Kumar Singh on the Tanu Nadi. In short, if the strength is unequal, the leader should not get entangled into a battle; if the chances are equal, he should cast the die; but, in either case of a forced or voluntary contest, never should a battle once begun be left, through fear or want of discipline, but, on the contrary, it should be fought on so desperately and so bravely, in spite of an assured defeat or of an immediate death, as never to lose fame, though success be lost in the field. Thus attacked, the enemy is struck with error, the followers do not get demoralised, discipline is not slackened, and inspiration increases by stories 
of martyrdom; bravery begets bravery, and victory becomes insured. The guerilla general and his forces should never give the least chance to create an impression that their foe conquered them through superiority in bravery. This is the key to guerilla warfare. 
But Tatia Tope could not follow this positive side of this warfare. Tatia's campaigns when trying to cross the Narbada and Kumar's campaigns when trying to cross the Ganges demonstrate this difference. Tatia suffered many a defeat. Though this was due entirely to the panicky and sometimes even cowardly conduct of the Sepoys, he had to lead and could not be attributed to any inferiority in his capacity. Kumar Singh, while marching off, had all the while kept up such a bold front and, whenever opportunity offered, had hit his pursuing foe so hard, that all the while his forces were full of self-confidence and high inspiration in spite of the fact that they were retreating before pursuing enemy. Now, it ought not to be forgotten that Tatia had to take up to guerilla tactics when his forces were already completely demoralised by previous defects and when all the veterans had been either killed or disabled in the earlier stages of the war, and so it was quite natural that, in spite of his skill and insight into the guerilla's art, he should not be able to put them in practice owing to the lack of materials. Whatever the reason, one thing is clear that, more than once, Tatiahad during his wonderful career as a general to leave the field through panic and fear striking his ranks; while Kumar Singh, like his prototype, the great Mahratta Shivaji, never allowed his army to become diffident, but created in them absolute confidence in themselves as well as in himself, their leader, by his personal valor and intrepidity and discipline; and he, also, exhibited matchless skill both in giving battle and in avoiding it - in both the positive and the negative sides of guerilla warfare; into dust, in the midst of a proud victory, on an independent throne, and under the banner of freedom - the old, the brave, the great Indian could die an honourable death! 
On the 26th of April,1858, Kumar Singh died. No sooner did this actor pass off from the stage than another - equally brave, equally noble, 
and equally patriotic - appeared on the scene. This new general was no other than the younder brother of Kumar Singh. Raja Amar Singh, without allowing a moment's slackening in the vigour of the war, without taking a rest of even four days, marched straight on the knock at the gates of Arrah itself! Having heard of the defeat of Le Grand of Arrah, the British forces which had stopped on the other side of the Ganges had by this time crossed it; and the two generals, Brigadier Douglas and general Lugard, marched on Raja Amar Singh on the 3rd of May. At Bihiya, Hatampur, Dalilpur, and several other places, each alternate day, the English forces attacked the Revolutionaries. Therefore, now Amar Singh resorted to different tactics. If he saw that the enemy was gaining the upper hand, he would order his forces to divide themselves into small bands, to retire in divers but well- mapped-our directions and, thus rendering pursuit by the enemy hopelessly impossible, to get united again at the appointment signal. How, now, to fight with this invisible army - was the chief question before the British. Every battle seemed to them quite decisive, but the very next moment the army of Amar Singh was as strong and as active at some other place as ever! No sooner he was driven from one end of the jungle then he appeared again in the second, and as soon as he was driven from that, he would wheel round and reign supreme in the first. At last, worn out, disgraced, and disappointed - the British general, Lugard, resigned on the 15th of June and returned to England to rest. His army, too left the field and entered the camp. 
And this was the signal for Amar Singh to reunite his bands and to appear on the battle-field with the pomp of a victorious general. Now the police of Gaya were won over to fight for the freedom of the nation. Then, sending the English forces on a wrong scent, Amar Singh attacked Arrah itself and entered it. Nay, now he is actually entering back into that capital of Jagadishpur. July passed; August and September also passed; - yet the banner of a free people was flashing forth from the towers of Jagadishpur and the Rana Amar Singh was reigning the beloved monarch of a liberated people! Brigadier Douglas and his seven thousand English forces were sworn to finish him. Nay, they had even offered prizes to anyone who would bring the head of Amar Singh by hook or crook. They had, by this time, cleared the jungles and made roads; from post to post, the British bands were constantly advancing; but nothing availed against the worthy successor of Kumar Singh. It was not possible for want of space to enumerate his different activities. Suffice it to say that the Rana Amar Singh fought in such a manner as to make his whole people think that Kumar Singh died not at all! 
At last, the English decided to end the whole campaign by a supreme effort and seven different armies advanced from seven different directions on Jagadishpur. All the roads leading to Jagadishpur were thus closed up and the Rana was caught as if in a trap. The cordon slowly began to close round Amar Singh and, at last, on the 17th of October, it tightened its grip on the capital itself. Alas! It is in this net that the liberty-loving lion is to be captured and killed! At the appointed time, all these forces rushed simultaneously from all directions into Jagadishpur and the helpless lion was hit - but, well done, Amar Singh, well done! It was the cage that was hit, and the lion had already escaped all unscatched! 
For, though six divisions had advanced and fallen on the town as ordered, yet the seventh one was late by five hours and the shrewd Amar Singh, with all his forces, vanished by his very side, taking full advantage of the delay of that division of the foe. 
Therefore, abandoning the plan which had proved so ineffectual as regards the crushing of the Behar Revolutionaries, the English government sent a division of mounted infantry to pursue them. This ever- increasing and ever-pursuing force of the enemy left not one moment of rest to Amar Singh. The new rifles that were introduced into the enemy's camp at this time had made the matchlocks of the Revolutionary forces almost useless, and the infantry found it impossible to outrun the horsemen's pursuit. Still, Amar Singh talked not of surrender! On the 19th of October 
the English forces shut up the Revolutionaries, first in the village of Nonadi and, out of four hundred of them, they cut off three hundred! The remaining one hundred dashed out desperately into the field outside, like infuriated tigers, and fought a bloody battle with the new division of British forces that had just arrived. It was found in the end that out of these only three escaped - and one out of the three was the Rana Amar Singh who had been fightting all the while incognito. Many were the bloody encounters and many the pools of blood through which the Panday army had to swim across. But, still, the flag of liberty was unbent! So narrow were theior escapes that, once, the very elephant of the Rana was captured; but the Rana jumped off from it and vanished. In this way, the Revolutionaries contested every inch of their ground, while being pressed onwards and onwards out of their province; and now they had reached the hills of Kaimur, for "the whole population of the district constantly and systematically misled the British pursuers by false information."49 
With this sympathy of the populace, the patriotic chief entered the Kaimur hills but was soon followed by the relentless foe pursuing in his track. Still there was no talk of surrender. Every hill and every dale, every hillock and every rock, fought on with the alien till the whole of the 
Panday army died fighting for the liberty of the land, for the honour of their Dharma! Died fighting, yes, for not only the men but even the women of that patriotic band did not return back to their homes as captives and slaves! The hundred and fifty ladies of the Royal palace of Raja Shrimant Kumar Singh, seeing that no hope or chance of success remained to them in this world, stood before the guns, set fire to the fuse with their own hands, and got themselves blown up into the - Immortality of Martyrdom! Thus fought Behar for its birthrights against the foreign foe! 
49 Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 344. 
But Rana Amar Singh did not fall into the hands of the enemy. Fortune left him, but his unconquerable soul could never! But what became of him? - Where did he end his days? Bewildered History echoes back, 'where?' 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-IX 
MOULVIE AHMAD SHAH 
AFTER the fall of Lucknow, there remained no powerful nucleus to concentrate the forces of the Revolutionaries in the provinces of Rohilkhand and Oudh. The tide of British conquest that has been sweeping over the Doab and Behar had driven all the Revolutionaries from these provinces into the ever-narrowing circle of Oudh and Rohilkhand. By this irresistible pressure on all sides and by want of powerful stronghold, the Revolutionaries had to give up the old system of open warfare and pitched battles and to take to guerilla tactics. Had they done so at the very start, the chances of success had been over whelmingly innumerable. But, better late than never! For, though success was rendered extremely difficult, yet there was not the least suggestion in the Revolutionary camp of surrender or desertion. So, the leaders of Oudh and Rohilkhand decided to continue the War of Independence by pursuing guerilla tactics, and issued the following Proclamation and military order all over the provinces: "Do not attempt to meet the regular columns of the infidels in open battle, because they are superior to you in discipline and they have big guns. But watch their movements, guard all the Ghats on the rivers, intercept their communications, stop their supplies, cut up their daks and posts, and keep constantly hanging about their camp. Give the Feringhi no rest!"50 Moulvie Ahmad Shah at once began to put into execution these orders. He began to hand about the camp of the British forces which were at Lucknow and camped at Bari, a place twenty-nine miles away from the English camp. The 
50 Russel says: "This general order bears marks of sagacity and points out the most formidable 
war we would encounter." - Diary, page 276. 
Begum Hazrat Mahal was encamped at Bitaoli with six thousand men. In order to break both these forces, Hope Grant started from Lucknow with a strong force of three thousand soldiers and a powerful artillery, first in the direction of Bari. The next day brought with it an incident which showed the wonderful courage and cleverness of the Revolutionary scouts. The Moulvie had sent out some of his scouts to get correct information about the British force. On the same night they entered the camp of the English with perfect nonchalance. The English watchmen stopped them and asked, "Who goes there?" "We are the men of the 12th regiment!" was the answer. This 
answer was literally true, for all of them had indeed belonged to the 12th regiment. But how were the poor watchmen to know that this 12th regiment was one of those which rose in rebellion as far back as the July of the previous year and had killed their English officer? The steady and firm step of these men, that resolute answer, and that fearless simplicity of behaviour drove away all suspicion about them, and the watchmen replied “Alright!” The daring band entered unopposed into the English camp, obtained all the information that they wanted, and came out all unscathed to report it to their master! 
Having thus informed himself of the exact situation and the plan of the British camp, the Moulvie quickly formed his plans, marches ahead, and took possession of a village four miles from Bari. The plan of the Moulvie was that, while his infantry should hold this village against the enemy, his cavalry should march ahead by a secret route and should wheel round and attack the rear of the British forces. He knew it for certain that the next morning the British general was coming to that very place, suspecting no harm and in a perfect sense of security. As soon as this unwary prey came into the trap, the Moulvie's infantry was to attack him from the front, while his cavalry was to fall on the enemy's flanks or rear. Malleson says: "It was realy a brilliant idea and did credit to his tactical skill." 
There were two things most necessary for the success of this brilliant design. The one thing was to keep perfect secrecy about the fources of the Moulview in the village; and the other was that the cavalry that was to make a flank attach should not sally forth and put the enemy on his guard before the front attack should be begun. The Moulvie did whatever he had to do. He sent his cavalry from Bari that same night by the route agreed on; he quietly took possession of the village and succeeded in concealing himself there, and so cleverly that the next morning actually saw the unsuspecting British general approaching the banks of the river. Half an hour more and the British forces would be done for! 
But in that half an hour, the splendid plan of the Moulvie was shattered to pieces by the impetuosity of the cavalry men. They had already occupied a very convenient place on the flank of the British forces and had been holding themselves ready to pounce upon the foe. But their leader, while lying in ambush, saw some guns unprotected in front of them and, forgetting the strict orders of the Moulvie, made for them with the intention of capturing them, and even captured and obtained possession of them for a while; but soon, the English woke to their danger, the guns were recaptured, and the whole plan of the Moulvie was shattered. For, this fighting at the rear opened the languid eyes of the English commander and he saw the danger in his rear as well as his front. Seeing his plan thus nullified by the rashness of his cavalry, the Moulvie who was holding the village left it after a skirmish and marched off - to find another opportunity and to mature another design. 
While Hope Grant was pressing the Revolutionaries upwards and upwards, from Bari to Bitaoli, with a view to drive them out of Oudh, there on the other side, on the 15th April, was being fought a hotly contested battle, near the fort of Ruiya. We have seen how, sometime before this, in the province of the Doab, the English army, being divided into separate divisions and marching by separate routes, pressed on the Revolutionaries simultaneously and systematically, sweeping off the whole province, till 
they drove them all into the town of Fatehgarh. In the same manner, a campaign had been organised and put into execution to sweep the Revolutionaries off the whole province of Oudh, by different British forces, from all possible quarters, pressing them onwards and upwards towards the northern frontier of Oudh. About the 1st of April, 1858, the total number of the white forces in India had risen to ninety-six thousand soldiers, besides which there were the loyal armies of the Sikhs. The brigades consisting of the Pathans, Pariahs, and other raw recruits, though originally raised in haste, had by this time become quite like veterans through constant experience on the field. Again, the 'contingent' forces of the native princes which had been sent forth to the assistance of the English, were also busy in the field. The pick of these innumerable brown and white troops were now engaged in the supreme effort of reconquering Oudh. As described in the last chapter, Lugard and Douglas were sent into Behar, Sir Hope Grant was sent towards Bari and Bitaoli, and Walpole was ordered to march up from the banks of the Ganges. Thus, these different forces, including those of the commander-in-chief and others, marching in the line to drive out the Revolutionaries to a man further and further to the north till they were pushed into Rohilkhand; and then, the idea was to annihilate them by one supreme effort. With this intention, Walpole too had started to do his own part on the 9th of April, 1858; and now, on the 15th of April, he was busy in attacking the fort of Ruiya which is fifty-one miles from Lucknow. 
It was not that either the fort of Ruiya was very strong or that its owner Narapat Singh was a very big and mighty chieftain. But small Zemindar though he was, ever since this great sacrificial fire was lighted up on the field of liberty, this Narapat Singh had offered himself with his all- in-all, as a willing victim for the regeneration of his nation. The 15th of April saw a mighty English army, armed with the most modern artillery, attacking this little chief in his tiny fort. As he had not even two hundred and fifty men with him in the forst, the English naturally expected that the chief must have already evacuated the place. But, on that very morning, one 
of the white prisoners whom Narapat Singh had released came to the English camp and informed the general that he had heard Narapat Singh say that he would evacuate the fort but not until he had had his vengeance. - Not until a gory fight is fought, not until one bloody defeat is inflicted will Narapat leave his fort! 
What! This little chief is to inflict a bloody defeat? And then alone is he to evacuate the fort? Walpole was furious and ordered his men to attack the fort. The English forces, as usual, circulated a rumour that the forces of Narapat Singh numbered about two thousand! When we are sure of crushing this Narapat Singn, what other way of magnifying our sure victory than of exaggerating the strength of the adversary? So even Walpole agreed that the forces with Narapat must be at least a thousand and five hundred. This released English captive who attests to the fact of only two hundred and fifty men defending the fort, though an eyewitness, might be a mad man! The English forces advanced - and that too, not on the weak side of the fort though its weakness was well-known to them, but the brave general would insist on marching against the strongest face of the fort! The defenders of the fort began to pour a shower of bullets as soon as they saw the British attacking the fort from among the trees in front of it. The shower grew hottest when the enemy approacdhed the ditch. Out of a hundred and fifty who marched, forty-six English soldiers were killed on the spot. Grove could not move one step forward on account of the fire of the Pandays. Now then, the skilful Walpole, seeing this crisis at the strong face of the fort, took his guns and rushed against the weak side of it; and with such accuracy he aimed his guns, that the English cannon balls sent from this side crossed over the fort and fell right amidst the English forces on the other side! Many are the generals who fight with their enemies, but matchless and the first without a second is General Walpole, who would fight with both friend and foe with equal skill and bravery! At the sight of this matchless skill of the veteran general, another general, Hope, came forth to save the day - but alas! he is killed by the unbearable fire of the Revolutionaries. Even grove 
is retiring - confusion worse confounded! The confused British army left the field and fell back, disgracefully repulsed! 
The death of this brave general, Hope, came as a shock over all Englishmen resident in India. Lord Canning and Sir Colin, why, all English was overwhelmed with grief. Not even the death of hundreds of soldiers would have inflicted such a sorrow and mourning on the English nation as did the death of this Hope - one of the bravest and most energetic of the English officers of that period. The tiny chieftain, Narapat Singh, had done what he said, "he had his vengeance", and then left the fort with his handful of men, and went on fighting with the unsullied banner of liberty in his hand! 
After these different divisions had swept off the Revolutionaries from the province of Oudh towards the north and then to Rohilkhand, the commander-in-chief got all the forces united and marched on to Rohilkhand in person. All the leaders of the Revolutionaries had now assembledin Shahjahanpur. There was Nana Sahib of Cawnpore and Moulvie Ahmad Shah. These two men had baffled all the innumerable attempts of the British generals to get hold of them and were still as energetic and unconquered as ever. So, when the news was brought to Sir Colin that these two leaders of the Revolutionaries were within his reach in the same place and perhaps ignorant of his movements, Sir Colin formed the shrewd plan of closing the town from all sides. He marched and closed on Shahjahanpur - but only to find that the birds had flown away! It was but natural that Sir Colin should be extremely piqued at this, as he had ordered four different forces to guard all the four sides, and the Revolutionary leaders escaped by the side guarded by the commander-in-shief himself! 
Now that the plan of Shahjahanpur was frustrated, Sir Colin was desirous of reducing at least the city of Bareilly. So, leaving a division of his forces with four guns in Shahjahanpur, he started and arrived on the 14th of May within a day's distance of Bareilly. The Rohilla, Khan Bahadur Khan 
was still holding out in this city. After the fall of Delhi and Lucknow, the Revolutionaries had been pouring into this still independent town of their party. Mirza Feroz Shah, the brave prince of the Delhi dynasty, Shrimant Nana Sahib, Moulvie Ahmad Shah, Shrimant Bala Sahib, Begum Hazrat Mahal, Raja Teja Singh, and many of the lesser leaders, had retreated into Rohilkhand and Bareilly, its capital, where still was waving the flat of a free people. And it was for this very reason that Sir Colin had vowed vengeance against this city. But in the Indian Camp there was no talk of making any stand at the city itself, as the leaders of the Revolution had determined, even according to the general order they had just issued, to resist the enemy by guerilla tactics. Their plan was to evacuate the city and get scattered all over the fields of Rohilkhand. All preparations had been made for leaving the city and only the last order of evacuation remained to be given. But when the brave Rohillas actually saw the hated Feringhi just near the town, the majority of them refused to evacuate the city without first tasting the steel of the foe - until, once at least, they had given proof of their readiness to die for the cause of their nation and their faith. 
The English forces that had surrounded that city were exceedingly strong. Their artillery was well-equipped and they had numerous guns; their cavalry and their infantry were well-armed and well- disciplined; and the command was in the hands of no less a general than the commander-in-chief Sir Colin Campbell himself. Against these, the guns of Khan Bahadur Khan could make no impression, and so, on that 5th of May, the Revolutionary guns had to be silent and the Revolutionary sword flashed forth. The sword belonged to the martyr-spirits who, in spite of the hopelessness of success, nay, in virtue of the hopelessness of success, instead of leaving the battle-field, preferred to embrace death with a smile on their lips and the unconquered and unconquerable faith in the holiness of their cause in their heart. To die while fighting in a good cause is the key to the gates of Heaven, that was their belief; and they knew that the cause of the freedom of a prople was one of the best causes for the sake of which one could lay down one's life. So they unsheathered their swords and dashed like thunderbolt on the English forces. With green turbans on their head, with a Kummerbund girded round their loins, and a silver ring inscribed with chosen sentences of the Koran in their finger, these terrible-looking Ghazis rushed up from the right, holding their head behind their shields, with their swords shining aloft in the sun, and shouting wildly their war-cry of "Din,Din!" They closed with the British troops with a tremendous shock, and, at this desperate attack, though they were very few, the British soldiers were startled and confused and swept away; the 42nd Highlanders tried to check their onrush - but the death-dealiong Ghazis still advanced, while some of them even succeeded in reaching to the rear of the British forces! Not one of them returned back - all of them fell while fighting and mowed down the English soldiery like sheaves before the scythe! They fell; they like lions, despising even the thought of retreat or surrender; one only fell without being byoneted by the enemy. Why? Wait a minute and the answer comes; for, there is coming up to this spot the Commander-in-Chief of the British forces; nay, he has come here! And just then this martyr, who had been pretending death, jumps up from among the corpses and falls on the commander, but alas! a loyal Sikh standing by the commander scents this danger and cuts the Ghazi off!51 
Of the few instances of the immortal bravery of martyrdom in the history of the worls, none can be greater than this! 
Next day, having baffled the attack of the British to capture them, the Revolutionaries, with Khan Bahadue Khan at their head, marched out of Bareilly on the 7th of May, 1858, and the English forces took possession of the evacuated capital of Rohilkhand. 
51 Russel's Diary. 
Disappointed on account of the safe escape of Khan Bahadur Khan out of his clutches, but still feeling triumphant for the capture of Bareilly, Sir Colin was standing in his mighty camp. Just then, there rose one deafening cry all over the camp – the cry of “The Moulvie! The Moulvie!! The Moulvie, again!!!” 
It was an extremely surprising design that the Moulvie was hatching there at the town of Shahjahanpur. Having baffled Sir Colin, it was not simply to avoid a fight that Nana Sahib and the Moulvie had left Shahjahanpur. All the government buildings in the town had been demolished by the order of Nana Sahib even before they left the town. The keen-sighted leaders had rightly gussed that the English commander would leave only a few troops in Shahjahanpur, and would proceed to Bareilly; and they had decided that, when he was thus away, the Moulvie should wheel round and fall on the city, crush the English forces there, and thus avenge the loss of Bareilly by the sack of Shahjahanpur. This was their plan and all things turned up as they guessed. For the British commander did go to Bareilly, leaving only a small detachment, though with a strong complement of artillery composed of four field- pieces. And the English detachment had to encamp on a plain, unprotected and open, as Nana Sahib had already caused all fortified places to be pulled down. On the 22nd of May, Moulvie Ahmad Shah started for Shahjahanpur by rapid marches, while his prey was indulging in false security. But, after midnight, the forces of the Moulvie - none can say by whose foolish obstinacy - stopped for a while within four miles of the town. This stay made the excellent plan barren of fruits, as "native spies employed by the British were on the alert, and one of them flew with the intelligence of his dangerous vicinity to Colonel Hale at Shahjahanpur." As soon as this traitorous spy brought the news, the British commander moved into the newly-built fortified position with his soldiers. The Moulvie pressed on, though now his prey was awake and occupying a strong position. He attacked and occupied the town, captured the fort, and levied a tax on the rich inhabitants of the place for the supplies of his 
forces. Even Malleson admits that, "in acting thus, he simply conformed to the custom of war in Europe." Not only this; but in a war of independence, when a handful of noble spirits offer their fresh blood to wipe off the shame and slavery of a whole nation, it is the duty of the people to support them voluntarily. After taking possession of the town the Moulvie brought eight guns, and began a cannonade on the fortified place where his foe was under shelter. When this news reacher Sir Colin at Bareilly on the 7th of May though he was surprised, his joy knew no bounds. The lost opportunity, which had worried the Commander-in-Chief so much ever since the escape of the Moulvie some days before, seemed now about to be restored by the action of the Moulvie himself. And therefore, taking the utmost precaution possible, Sir Colin started by forced marches to pounce upon his prey. Now, it was clear that there was no loop-hole whatsoever left through which the Moulvie Ahmad Shah could escape. From the 11th of May, for three days there was a continuous fight. It was, indeed, impossible for the Moulvie to escape. So, from all sides the different Revolutionary leaders brought all their forces together, in order to save this most popular and most energetic of patriots. The Begum of Ayodhya, Mayyan Sahib, the King of Mahmadi, the Prince Feroze Shah of Delhi, Nana Sahib of Cawnpore - all these leaders poured in with their forces, before the 15th of May, to help the flag of liberty, now in such immediate danger in Shahjahanpur. Thus reinforced, the Moulvie marched out of Shahjahanpur, warring night and day with his 
now discomfited foe, and again escaped the coils that the commander-in- chief had prepared for him. So sure was Sir Colin of capturing the Moulvie that, in view of the certainty of the ruin of the Revolutionary party at Shahjahanpur, he had already issued orders for dividing his forces again and sending them to different directions. And, having dashed to pieces these orders and hopes of the enemy, where did the Moulvie go? He entered Oudh - the very province which the English had, after a year's trouble and bloodshed and with the greatest difficulty, succeeded in sweeping clear of the Revolutionaries. Sir Colin conquered Ayodhya - the Moulvie occupied 
Rohilkhand; now, Sir Colin comes and conquers Rohilkhand - the Moulvie wheels back and again occupies Oudh! 
In such a dogged manner and with such bravery did the Moulvie fight with the foreign foe. 
The British power is now bent on crushing him and putting an end to his dangerous activities. Is there anyone who would assist them in this plight? Whose sword is mighty enough to kill this powerful headof the Revolution, whom the sword of Sir Colin has proved too blunt to cut? What is the best way to accomplish this end? 
What is the best way? There need not be any such anxiety in the English camp. Is it not true that the British sword had, many a time before the present, proved equally helpless and unsuccessful in eradicating the enemies of British power in India? Well then, those who could and did save England in all those periods of danger and despair would come forward to save her once more. If the English sword is too blunt to cut to pieces this Indian patriot, let the dagger of treachery accomplish the task! 
After the re-entry into Oudh, while trying to offer as much and as dogged a resistance to the foreigner as he could, the Moulvie thought it would be a great help to the new storm that he was preparing to raise in Oudh if the Raja of Powen would lend the little might he possessed to drive out the alien from the land. With this purpose, he sent a request sealed with the Royal seal of the Begum to this Raja at Powen. This tiny Raja was quite shocked at the mere mention of war and battlefield. Yet, as treacherous as he was cowardly, he wrote back that he would like to see the Moulvie personally. In answer to this invitation, the Moulvie started to see this Raja. But, to the Moulvie's great surprise, he foud the gates of the town closed and the walls of it guarded by armed men; and in the midst of them, he found standing the Raja Jagannath Singh himself, with his brother by his 
side. Though the Moulvie knew the meaning of this sight, still undaunted, he began to hold a parley with the Raja. The wretch on the walls 
of the town was naturally the last man to appreciate his eloquence. When it became clear that the crowd was not going to open the gates willingly, the Moulvie ordered his Mahut to goad on the elephant on which he was sitting to break upon the gates of the fort. One stroke more of the mighty animal's head - and the gates would have been forced. But, the brother of the Raja took aim and Moulvie Ahmad Shah was shot deat by the hand of that wretched coward! The fat Raja and his brother at once came out of the gate, severed the head of the Moulvie from his body and, covering it up in a cloth, ran forth to the nearest British Thana, thirteen miles from the place, - to the city of Shahjahanpur. Here the British officers were at their table in the dining-room. The Raja came in, unpacked the burden which he had held forth as a trophy, and let roll on the ground, by the feet of the officers, the head of the Moulvie still gushing with blood! Next day, the civilised Britishers hung on the kotawali the head of an enemy who had fought against them so bravely and so honouraly, and the fact brute of Powen was rewarded with fifty thousand Rupees for this, his nefarious act of treachery! 
As soon as the news of his death reached England, the relieved Englishmen felt that " the most formidable enemy of the British in Noprthern India was no more!"52 In person, the 
Moulvie was tall, lean and muscular, with large deep-set eyes, bettle brows, a high aquiline nose, and lantern jaws. The life of this brave Mahomedan shows that a rational faith in the doctrines of Islam is in no way inconsistent with, or antagonistic to, a deep and all - powerful love of the Indian soil; and that the true believer in Islam will feel it a pride to belong to, and privilege to die for, his mother-country! Even the English historian Malleson, in no way inclined to assess rightly – far less to exaggerate – the 
52 Hlome's History of the Indian Mutiny, page 539. 
virtues of the Revolutionist leaders, is carried off by his inner feelings and, forgetting for the moment that he is an Englishman, remarks: “The Moulvie was a very remarkable man.... Of his capacity as a military leader many proofs were given during the revolt, but none more decisive than those recorded in this chapter. No other man could boast that he had twice foiled Sir Colin Campbell in the field! .... Thus dies the Moulvie Ahmand’allah (sic) of Fyzabad. If a patriot is a man who plots and fights for the independence, wrongfully destroyed, of his native country, then most certainly the Moulvie was a true patriot. He had not stained his sword by assassination; he had connived at no murders; he had fought manfully, honourably, and stubbornly in the field 
against the strangers who had seized his country; and his memory is entitled to the respect of the brave and true-hearted of all nations."53 
53 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 381. 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
CHAPTER-X 
RANI LAKSHMI BAI 
GIVE up my Jhansi? I will not. Let him try to take who dares!" With this challenge the heroic Ranee of Jhansi rose against the British and as it is recorded in previous parts of this History she assumed the leadership of the Revolution, drove the English and began to rule at Jhansi as the Queen of the province. The forces of the Revolution had wreaked a bloody vengeance on the English people and army and left not a trace of their rule at Sagar. Naogaon, Banda, Banapur, Shahgarh and Karki. The people everywhere hailed the Queen as their own. She then busied herself - in restoring order and peace in her liberated province. 
The Ranee's daily life at this period has been described as follows :- "The Bai got up at five in the morning and took a bath with fragrant attar. After dressing - and she generally wore a Chanderi Saree of faultless white - she would sit for her daily prayers. First, she dropped the necessary water as a prayaschitta for keeping hair on her head after her husband's death; then, she used to worship the Tulsi in the Tulsi grove. Then began the Parthiva Puja at which the Durbar musicians would sing in choir. Puraniks would then start reading the Puran. Then, Sirdars and dependants came and she returned their usual salutes. Being very keen of memory, even if a single man among the seven hundred and fifty who paid their respects to her in the morning was not present, the very next day, the Bai would not fail to inquire why he did not come the previous day. After the worship of God began the dinner. After dinner, she would take an hour's siesta unless there was urgent work to do. Then she would order the presents of the morning to be brought before her, which was done on silver trays covered over with silk cloths. Those things that she liked, she accepted; the others were given over to the Kothiwalla (minister of the presents department) for distribution 
amongst her servants. At three she went to the Durbar, when she usually put on male attire. She wore a pyjama, a coat of dark blue, a cap on the heat, and a beautiful turban on the top of it, a dupeta of embroidered cloth round the slender waist, and the sword decked with gems by her side. Attired in this wise, this fair woman looked like Gauri herself. Sometimes, she wore the female dress. After her husband's death, she never wore nath or similar ornaments. Her hands had round them bangles of diamond; she wore a small necklace of pearls round her neck and a diamond ring on her little finger. These were the only jewels worn by the Bai Sahib. Her hair was gathered up together behind. She wore a white saree and a plain white bodice. Thus, sometimes in male attire and sometimes in female, the Bai Sahib used to honour the Durbar by her presence. Those assembled in Durbar never used to see her person. For the room in which she sat was separate from, and only opened into, the Durbar hall. Gold carving adorned the doors, and over these fell gracefully the chintz curtain, embroidered with gold cloths. In this room sat the Bai Sahib on a gadi of soft down, leaning on a soft pillow. Outside the door, two pages with maces of silver and sold always attended. Opposite the room, Lakshman Rao Dewanji stood with a bundle of important documents in his hand, and beyond him sat the Registrars of the Durbar. Being very keen and intelligent, the Bai quickly grasped every matter brought before her, and her orders were clear and definite and to the point. Sometimes she wrote her orders out herself. She was very careful in affairs of justice, and decided civil and criminal cases alike with great ability. Ranee Sahib worshipped Mahalakshmi devoutly. The temple of that Goddess was situated on the banks of a lake filled with lotus flowers, and every Friday and Tuesday the Bai visited the temple. One day, it so happened that after the 
Bai had returned from the temple and was passing through the south gate, she was thousands of beggars blocking the passage and creating a disturbance. So, she inquired of the Minister, Lakshman Rao Pande, the reason of this. He inquired and informed her that the people were very poor, 
and that they suffered immensely on account of excessive cold, and that, therefore, they requested that the Bai would kindly consider their condition. The Bai left very grieved for these poor people, and she at once issued orders - kind-hearted that she was - that, on the fourth day from thence, a gathering of beggars should take place, where every one should be provided with a thick coat and a cap and a blanket either white or black. The very next day, all the tailors of the town were given orders to make caps and coats. On the day appointed it was proclaimed that all the beggars were to gather in front of the palace. Poor people, too, had been included in his gathering. All were given clothes by the Bai and they went away satisfied In the fight with Nathe Khan when the wounded men were brought into the city, the Bai herself would insist on being present when their wounds were being dressed. Her very presence soothed their pain, and they felt themselves sufficiently rewarded by the kind and sympathetic interest she took in their well-being. The Ranee grieved at their grief, gave them ornaments and medals, patted them, and showed such sympathy that others, instead of being disheartened at the sight of these wounded soldiers, felt that they could even give up their lives for the sake of the Ranee. The grandeur of the Bai's processions passes description. On the occassions of the visits to the temple of Mahalakshmi, she started sometimes in a palanquin, and sometimes on horseback. When in the palanquin, the palanquin would be covered with curtains of gold and embroidered cloths tied with golden ribbon. When she was on horseback, in male attire, the end of a thin and beautiful batti floated on her back and it fitted her admirably. The national flag of freedom was carried before her, with the band playing military music. Two hundred Europeans followed the flag and a hundred horsemen rode before and behind her. With the palanquin came the karbharis, ministers, feudatories, and other officers like Bhayya Sahib Upasane; and others either rode or followed on foot. Sometimes troops accompanied the procession. When the Bai started from the palace, the choughada on the fort 
made sweet music. The choughada of the nagarkhana of Mahalakshmi started at the same time."54 
And thus, from the Vindhyas to the Jumna, there was not a vestige of British authority left, Brahmins, Moulvies, Sirdars, Dorkdars, Sepoys, the police, Rajas, Raos, bankers, villagers - all were desirous fighting for only one thing, and that was Independence! And to unite together these thousand voices in one harmonious whole, the Lakshmi of Jhansi declared with her sweet but firm voice "None can have my Jhansi; he who dares may try!" 
Very rarely had the world heard such a firm "No!" Generous and liberal to a fault India has always been pronouncing and swearing by "I shall give!", "I shall give!", so far. But here was a strange phenomenon to-day - a set face and a stern voice which said, "I will not give! I will not give up my Jhansi!" Would to heaven, O Mother, that every one of thy sons and daughters had said the same! The Feringhi was taken aback at this unexpected assertion; and Sir Hugh Rose was sent, with five thousand armed men and a considerable number of guns, to gauge the extent of the disturbance and to quell it. 
In the beginning of 1858, the English had drawn up a complete military plan for the reconquest of all the territory, from the Himalayas to the Vindhyas, which was under the Revolutionaries. The whole territory was divided into two portions, and to each of them a huge army was sent to subdue it. We have in an earlier chapter described how commander-in- chief Sir Colin Campbell marched upwards from Allahabad to the north of the Ganges and the Jumna and, with his big army, conquered the Doab, and crossed the Ganges and marches on Lucknow; how, after destroying Lucknow, he extinguished the flames of insurrection ranging in Behar, in Benares and round if, and in Oudh; how he forced all the Revolutionaries 
54 D.B.Parasnis's Life of Lakshmi Bai, paged 147-151. into Rohilkhand, where the final engagement took place, and how, thus, the northern portion of the territory which was in the hands of the Revolutionaries was reconquered by the English. While Sir Colin was advancing from the north of the Jumna towards the Himalayas, Sir Hugh Rose advanced to conquer the southern portion lying between the Jumna and the Vindhyas. In the north, the Sikhs, the Gurkhas, and other Indian troops and feudatories had joined Sir Colin; so also in the south, Sir Hugh Rose had on his side the help of the princes of Hyderabad, Bhopal, and other states. He had, in addition, got the valuable assistance of the troops of Madras and Bombay and the Hyderabad contingent. To mention specially that the Indian troops had joined Sir Hugh Rose is unnecessary. For, to mention that Sir Hugh Rose was successful would imply the first proposition. For the English to obtain a victory, of themselves, is as impossible as the most impossible thing in the world. The traitorous Indian troops thus collected together for conquering the southern parts were divided into two divisions. One was under the command of Brigadier Whitlock who was to start from Jubbulpore and, subduing the provinces on the way, was eventually to join Sir Hugh Rose. The other was under Sir Huge Rose himself. As soon as Whitlock started from Jubbulpore, Sir Hugh was also to start from Mhow; he was to advance through Jhansi on Kalpi. According to the plan of campaign, Sir Huge started from Mhow on the 6th of January 1858 and, after a fight, he captured the fort of Rajgarh. From thence, he advanced to Sagar, released the prisoners kept there by the Revolutionaries, advanced further south, reducing various positions of the enemy on the way, captured Banapur on the 10th of March, and reconquered the famous fort of Chanderi. On the 20th of March, the triumphant English army encamped about fourteen miles from Jhansi. By these many struggles, bands of Revolutionaries distributed all over the country from the banks of the Narbada upwards, now crowded into Jhansi; and that is why Sir Hugh advanced with great dispatch on Jhansi to reduce this stronghold of the Revolutionaries. But Lord Canning and Sir Colin both issued orders to Sir Hugh first to relieve the Raja of Charkhari who was being besieged by 
Tatia. This order, if he obeyed it, would have spoiled Sir Hugh's plan of reducing Jhansi. What was he to do? He could neither disobey nor find his way to obey the orders. As, in these trying circumstances, the best interests of the British government lay in advancing on Jhansi, Sir Robert Hamilton took upon himself the whole responsibility of disobeying the orders of the two highest authorities in Hindusthan; and the British army, emboldened by a high national feeling, advanced towards Jhansi, hopeful of victory. But the English army suffered enormously as soon as they set foot on the soil of Jhansi. For they found, to their great surprise, that all the tract of land surrounding Jhansi had been laid waste by order of the Queen in orderthat the enemy should have no supplies of any sort. Not a blade of corn in the fields, not a vestige of grass on the meadows, not a tree which could afford shelter; So had William of Orange, when there appeared to be a possibility of the Netherlands falling into the hands of the Spanish tyrant and invader, ordered that the dykes be opened and the sea let in, rather than that the country should fall in the hands of the enemy. And this day Jhansi had adopted a similar course. 
The same terrible thunder is in her voice; her eyes are spouting forth the red flames of anger! Mardan Singh, Raja of Banapur, the enraged chief of Shahagarh, the brave Thakurs, with their lives in their hands, Sirdars of Bundelkhand, resolute as ever, with their many followers - all these hot incendiary elements in the interior of Jhansi are burning and flame-red. The flames leap up even as the Jaripatka; and look, the central figure of the whole fight is there, shining above all! Aye, she is the central idea, the flashing impersonation of Swaraj! She is the inspiration, she is the incarnation of Liberty! 
In spite of the barrenness of the country around, the English approached Jhansi. For, thanks to the loyalty of the Scindia and the Raja of Tehri, the force was throughout the operations abundantly supplied with 
grass, firewood, and vegetables.55 As the Scindia and the Raja of Tehri are helping the Feringhis, surrounded as you are by treachery and disloyalty, betrayed by relations as by strangers, you have not the slightest hope of success. Why not then avoid extinction by surrendering to the English? But, surrender? And for the Ranee of Jhansi? Dewan Lakshman Rao, Moro Punt Tambe, brave Thakurs and Sirdars, all heroes of Liberty, if you surrender, you will be saved; if you fight, you will die. Which will you choose? 
Jhansi answered from her thousand mouths, sternly, in the words of the Scripture, "As everyone who is born must die, why sully fair fame uselessly?" 
So, it was determined to give battle to the English for the honour of the country. And Jhansi was busy by night and by day preparing for the fight. Brave men, there were many in her army; but trained men, there were very few. Want of discipline was very apparent. The queen herself, however, let the whole army. On every rampart and every gate, she was moving about actively; she was standing where guns were being planted and moved into position; she was budy selecting clever gunners; and she was to be found everywhere inspiring heroism even in the coldest hearts. The learned Brahmins of Jhansi were praying for the success of the country. Its temples blessed the soldier who went to the field, and tended the wounded who returned from battle; its workmen were busy preparing ammunition and other necessary for war. The men of Jhansi manned their guns, loaded the muskets; its women carried ammunition, built Top Khanas, supplied provisions.56 When the night of the 23rd fell, sounds of battle- drums were heard throughout the town and lighted torches shone forth at frequent intervals from the fort. The guards fired a few shots too. The 
55 Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, page 110. 
56 “The women were seen working in the batteries and carrying ammunition, etc.”- Sir Hugh Rose. 
morning of the 24th approached. No more delay now! The Ghanagarj (thunder-clap) gun began its work. The noise made by that gun was terrific. 
We shall quote an eye witness’s account of the early stages of the siege. 
"From the 25th, the engagement began in right earnest. The enemy poured in a heavy fire all day and night. In the night came cannon- balls on the forst and the city. The sight was terrible to see. A cannon-ball of fifty or sixty pounds weight would look as small as a tennis ball but red like live charcoal. During the day one would not see these balls clearly for daylight, but in the night, they were clearly visible and gave a weird appearance to the night. On the 26th, at midday, the English silenced the guns on the southern gate, and not a man could make a stand there. All men in the field were nearly disheartened at this. Then, the gunner on the western gate moved the gun round and fired at the enemy; the third shot killed the best gunner in the English army, and the English gun was silenced, in its turn. At this, the Bai Sahib was very pleased and presented the gunner with a silver anklet. The name of the brave gunner was Gulam Ghose Khan. He had displayed similar skill in the engagement with Nathe Khan also. 
"On the fifty or the sixth day, the same sort of engagement took place. For four or five hours, the Bai's guns were working wonders and the English lost heavily. Many of their guns, too, were silenced for some time. Then again, the English guns would be more vigorous, and the Jhansi troops would be disheartened and their guns silenced. On the seventh day, at sunset, 
the gun to the left was disabled. None could stand there. The battlement was destroyed owing to the enemy’s fire. But in the night, eleven masons were brought under cover of blankets to the walls of the fort, and the work was completed before the day dawned. Thus, the battlement was repaired, and the English, to their great surprise, found the Jhansi gun in working order. 
At this time, the English were careless. They suffered considerably and their guns were disabled for quite a long time. 
“On the morning of the eighth day, the English army went for Shankar Killa. The English had very expensive and modern telescopes and, with their aid, they began to pour a heavy fire on the reservoir of water within the fort. Of the six or seven who approached near for taking water, four were killed: the others ran leaving their vessels there. As they could not get water for nearly four hours, even baths and other ordinary functions could not be carried on. Now, the gunners on the western and southern gates stopped the guns of the English attacking the Shankar Killa, by a continued fire on them. Then it became possible to get water from the reservoir for bath and dinner. There was a powder factory in the tamarind grove. As soon as two maunds of powder was prepared, it was taken to the sellers to be stocked. A cannon- ball fell on the factory, and thirty men and eight women were killed. On the same day, there was a great turmoil. There was a terrible fight. The fighters were shouting loudly. There was a terrific noise from muskets, and guns firing heavily. Trumpets and bugles were sounding everywhere. Dust and smoke filled the air. Many gunners on the ramparts and a number of Sepoys were killed. Others were appointed in their place. The Bai Sahib was working very hard. She looked to everything, issued the necessary orders, and repaired every point of weakness. By this, the men in the army were very much encouraged and fought continually. On account of this determined resistance, the English, in spite of all their powder and ammunition, could not enter the fort till the 31st of March."57 
But pressed as she is by this constant succession of disasters, why is Queen Lakshmi looking so earnestly in that particular direction? And see, she is smiling too! Be ready now and fire your salutes; let triumphal drums beat loudly; let war-cries rend the air! For there is Tatia Tope advancing with his army to aid Jhansi! 
57 D.B.Parasnis's Life of Lakshmi Bai, pages 187-193. 
with his twenty-two thousand troops. While playing as children, people hardly noticed them; to-day, the whole world is looking on their game! 
Tatia Tope has come with his army to dishearten the English army and to give courage to Jhansi. After the defeat of Wyndham at Cawnpore and Sir Colin’s victory, Tatia crossed the Ganges and joined Shrimant Nana. Then, leaving Nana, he crossed the Jumna near Kalpi. As the Raja of Charkhari refused to help in the war for the country started by the Peshwa, Tatia, as representative of the Peshwa, attacked his capital, punished the traitor well, captured twenty-four of his guns, and took from him a contribution of three lacs of Rupees. And then Tatia turned towards Kalpi. There, he received a letter from Ranee Lakshmi Bai requesting him to come to Jhansi and relieve the siege. He sent the note to the Rao Sahib Peshwa, the chief in authority; and, as soon as he got the orders, he charged the rear of the English army. It is on seeing him that a smile of hope has come to the lips of Lakshmi. These two had played together as children in the palace at Brahmavarta, without anyone noticing them particularly. To- day they are playing on the battle-field; the one, on the fortifications of Jhansi, is standing amidst rings of flaming fire, the other is approaching close to the Betwa, with his twenty-two thousand troops. While playing as children, people hardly noticed them; to-day, the whole world is looking on their game! 
Tatia had under him, now, the largest number of troops he ever had, and hence the English were not a little disconcerted. They would have been completely so in the battle too, handful as they were. For, in front of them was the Ranee Lakshmi Bai; behind them was this Mahratta tiger, with his twenty-two thousand claws. Why should he not, then, tear Sir Hugh to pieces and eat him up? He advanced to do this, but his twenty-two thousand claws seemed all of a sudden disabled, they could hardly be lifted. And what could even a tiger do without his claws? Alas! A most shameful poltroonish cowardice was exhibited by the Revolutionary troops on the river Betwa. 
The army of Jhansi was to attack the rear, and Tatia was to attack the front; the plan was admirable. But the English, with the dash of despair, advanced on Tatia and opened fire on Jhansi. This nullified the two attacks of the aggressive party. One determined attack, like that of the Mawalas of Shivaji or the select band of Kumar, and vultures had fed upon the Union Jack and its followers. But, the English charged straight on the enemy. The cowards did not even offer fight, and - was it treachery or terror - not a cannon-shot from Jhansi was heard. So, the army and its commander were routed and ran away. Plentiful military supplies were captured by the English, Tatia's guns fell into their hands, and one thousand and five hundred of the Revolutionaries were killed in the pursuit. Fifteen hundred people killed in the flight! Mad men and fools! Instead of dying the death of cowards while fleeing, if you had only attacked Sir Huge Rose, you would have died the death of the Ghazis of Bareillyk, you would have destroyed the whole army with Sir Hugh Rose, and your name would have lived for ever! Yet God forgive you! If not our respect, you deserve at least our sympathy. For, howsoever you died, you died for the liberty of your country! May my country learn from your death at least the lesson that soldiers who fly to live, die, and that those who fight to die, live! 
And for death was Ranee Lakshmi Bai fighting! Why, then, this hopelessness on the part of Sirdars, Thakurs, and Sepoys? For nine days and nine nights, you stood the deadly charge of gun-fire in the hope that Tatia Tope would soon come to your aid. When he came, you shouted for delight; by the defeat of Tatia on the 1st of April, not only that joy but the very hope of victory is dashed to pieces; and those supplies, to deprive the enemy of which thousands of lives had been sacrificed, have fallen with ease into the enemy's hands. Tatia's ammunition and guns also have fallen into their hands. All this is certainly true. But, why this despair? The enemy may render it impossible for you to live victorious, but he cannot deprive you of a death of glory. There is nothing to despair for, then! And stop, hear the steady, firm, courageous voice of Ranee Lakshmi. 
"It was not relying on the Peshwa that Jhansi fought so long nor does she require his help to continue her fight in the future. So far, your bravery have been exhibited by you most admirably. I urge to do the same now and to fight with courage and desperation." 
Aye, fight with desperation, be ready, let the battle-drums beat, and the trumpets sound! Let was-cries rend the air and let big guns thunder forth! The 3rd of April has dawned and the last assault of the English on Jhansi has begun. They are coming from all sides and pressing hard. Start, then, in right, good, deadly earnest! See how the goddess of war has taken the sword and see how she is making her way through the troops. She is moving about with lightning rapidity, presenting some with golden bracelets, some with dresses; some she is touching with her sacred touch to pat, to some she is offering her sweet smile; others she is encouraging with her heroic words. So now! Gulam Ghose Khan and Kuar Khuda Bhaksh, let the fire be most deadly! The enemy is storming the main gate and the fortifications, ladders have been planted at eight different places. "Har, Har, Mahadev!" From the fort, from ramparts, and from houses came a perfect shower of bullets, a constant succession of shots. The deep-mouthed cannon are vomiting forth burning red-hot balls. "Maro Feringhiko!" Lieutenant Dick and Lieutenant Meiklejohn have mounted the ladders and are calling upon their men to follow them. Boom, boom! Instantly, the daring Englishmen fell in the jaws of death! Anyone coming behind? Lieutenant Bonus and heroic Lieutenant Fox, you seem anxious for death - your desire shall be accomplished; - die, then! Seeing these four heroes who had scaled with the greatest difficulty shot down, the ladders trembled. They swayed and broke under the weight of the English troops. The English sounded the bugle to retire; the army began to go back - it went back, the soldiers concealing themselves behind every stray stone!58 
58 “No sooner did we turn into the road leading towards the gate, than the enemy’s bugle sounded, and a fire of indescribabl e fierceness opened upon us from the whole line of the walls and from the tower of the fort overlooking this site. For a time it appeared like a sheet of fire, 
A strong defence was thus offered at the principal gate. But who is giving forth that tragic wail near the southern ramparts? May it be that mean treachery had lost the Morcha gate? Yes, unfortunately yes; the English have captured the gate, with the air of treachery - so it is said - and they have mounted the ramparts, and are advancing rapidly on. There was no other thought that day but to kill or be killed! Once within the city, the English gave no quarter and streams of blood flowed freely. The English, taking one position after another, massacring, firing, destroying - came right up to the palace. As soon as the palace was forced, thousands of Rupees were looted, guards were massacred, and buildings were destroyed. At last, alas! Jhansi had fallen into the enemy's hands! 
Standing on the rampartrs, the Ranee looked back for one moment at Jhansi. Before her rose the hideous picture of the terrible disaster that had happened near the south gate. The enemy had, after all, defiled her Jhansi! Her eyes were ablaze with anger; she was almost mad with rage. She took up her sword and, with her small force of a thousand or fifteen hundred men, she marched down the fort. The tigress to avenge her cubs runs not so fleetingly. As soon as she saw the white troops near the southern gate, she rushed for them, and then, “swords crossed, the two armies were mixed up before you could count even fifty; swords flourished and dealt heard blows. Many Englishmen were killed. The rest ran towards the town and began to fire shots from under cover!” By this sight of Feringhi blood, the anger of this Kali was a little appeased, and now she saw that it was foolhardy to fight alone so far from the fort. But echoes of such daring heroism were now to be heard in every street in the city. Fifty stablemen in the palace, while the whole town and the palace itself was bathed in blood shed by English 
out of which burst a store of bullets, round shots, and rockets destined for our annihilation...... But the fire of the enemy waxed stronger, and amidst the chaos of sounds, of volleys of musketry and roaring of cannon, hissing and bursting rockets, stink-pots, infernal machines, huge stones, blocks of wood, and trees, all hurled upon our heads, it seemed as though Pluto and the Furies 
had been loosened upon us, carrying death amongst us fast. At this instant a bugle sounded on our right 
for the Europeans to retire.” – Lowe’s Central India, page 254. 
swords, refused to give up the stables! “Surrender” was a word not to be found in their dictionary. Everyone of these men cut down the enemy as hard as he could, and it was only when everyone of them was killed that the paga fell into the enemy’s hands! The English had, by now, rendered the whole town desolate. Everyone who fell into their hands, from children of five to old men of eighty, were massacred; the whole city was set fire to; wailings from the wounded and the dying, and the cries of those who killed, filled the air. A huge wail rose from the whole town! 
When the Queen stood on the walls of the fortress (which the enemy had decided to storm only the next day on account of its strength), looking at this sad, sad picture, she was smitten with grief and tears started to her eyes! The Queen of Jhansi wept! Those beautiful eyes were red with weeping! Her Jhansi to be reduced to this! Then she looked up and saw the flag of the Feringhi flying over the walls of Jhansi, and a strange fire shone from those weeping eyes! All glory to her courage! But why is this messenger running hard towards her? He said, "Your Majesty, the pre- eminently brave Sirdar who guarded the chief gate of the fort, Sirdar Kuar Khuda Buksh, and Gulam Ghose Khan, the chief gunner of the artillery, have both been shot down by the English!" What a blow this to the already afflicted Queen! What a succession of disasters this! What is your next plan, then, Queen? Aye, one and one alone! She said to the messenger, who was no other than an old Sirdar, " I have determined to blow myself up with the fort, setting fire to the ammunition with my own hands." With her Jaripatka she must be - if not on the throne, at least on the pyre! 
Hearing this, the old Sirdar calmly replied, "Your Majesty, as it is not safe to be in this neighbourhood now, your Majesty should leave the fort to-night breaking through the enemy's camp and should join the Peshwa's forces. If death comes on the way, the conquest of heaven by a dip in the sacred waters of the battle-field is always at hand!" Lakshmi said, "I should choose to die on the battle-field, but, being a woman, I fear that the enemy might insult my person!" To this the whole Durbar answered with one voice: "Insult! So long as there is life in the body of the least among us, our sword shall cut to pieces the enemy who woulod dare so much as touch your sacred person!" 
Well then, the night had fallen; Lakshmi greeted all her dear subjects and gave them her blessings for the last time! Her subjects were full of tears at the thought that she was leaving Jhansi, perhaps for ever. She took a selected number of horsemen with her. An elephant with jewels on him was placed in the middle and Ranee Lakshmi descended the fort amidst cries of "Har, Har, Mahadev!" She put on male apparel; a steel armour covered her person, a Jammia was in her girdle; a fine sword hung from her belt, a silver cup was in her Pudder, and her adopted child Damodar was on her back, tied in silk Dhoti. Thus accoutred, riding on a noble white steed, this queen, Lakshmi, looked like the goddess of war. When the north gate came, the sentry who belonged to the traitor army of the Tehri State asked, "Who goes there?" "The army of Tehri is going to the aid of Sir Huge Rose," was the answer. The sentry was satisfied and Ranee advanced, evading the English sentry too in a similar manner. One maid, one bargeer, and ten or fifteen horsemen formed her body-guard, and marched through the camp of the enemy. But her other horsemen were stopped by the English on suspicion and had to fight hard. Moro Punt Tambe, wounded though he was, was able to run as far as Datia. But the traitor Dewan of that State captured him and gave him over to the English, who later on hanged him. 
But, Lakshmi, put your horse now in a gallop. For Lieutenant Bowker is galloping behind, followed by select horsemen, in order to capture you. And you, O horse, fortunate on account of the sacred treasure you carry, gallop on! Let the men of Bharata be traitors, but, ye animals, ye at least be faithful! O Night, drop the curtain of darkness between Queen Lakshmi and her enemies ! O horse, fleeting as you are, quicker than the wind, balance Lakshmi lightly! Ye paths, do not obstruct the horse's onward march! O ye stars, shine not for the enemy, but just shine so that this tender beauty, delicate as a flower, should be encouraged on the way by your rays, 
cool as nectar! The dawn has now broken; so, heroic Queen, flying all night on the wings of the wind, rest thee near the village of Bhandeir. The Mahalkuree of the village will feed your darling Damodar. 
As soon as breakfast was over, she again started on her journey on the Kalpi road. But what is this dust behind? Spur your horses on! Lakshmi, keep Damodar safe on the back and gallop on. Tak our your sword! There, Bowker is pressing close! Here is the reward for your wicked pursuit! Dare you hold back the lightning? A long sweep of her sword, and Bowker was violently thrown off his horse. A deadly fight took place between her fifteen or twenty horsemen and the English pursuers; those who were alive advanced forward to protect Lakshmi Bai. Wounded Bowker and his handful of men gave up the pursuit. The sword of the Mother advanced triumphant, shining. The sun in the heaven above, Ranee Lakshmi Bai on earth - both were marching forward. Morning was gone and mid-day came, but the Ranee did not stop. Afternoon came, the shades of evening began to fall, the sun went down the horizon - but the Ranee still would not stop. The stars rose. They saw her just as they had seen her the night before - marching, marching in hot haste. At last, at midnight, Ranee Lakshmi entered Kalpi. A ride of a hundred and two miles she accomplished, and that, fighting with Lieutenant Bowker and his soldiers and with the burden of a child on her back. That horse just lived, it so seemed, to carry her to Kalpi. For, as soon as he saw the rider safe in Kalpi, he fell down on the ground all in a heap. Six men were immediately ordered to attend to the horse. The Ranee loved the horse very much. A horse which carried safe such a person with such faithfulness deserves to be remembered, and his memory will be loved for all time. 
The Ranee slept till dawn. In the morning, the touching meeting between the Ranee and Shri Rao Sahib Peshwa took place. Both remembered their ancestors - the thought that they were descended from those who had done such seemingly impossible deeds inspired them both. They realised that the flag of the Mahratta empire waved as far as Attock 
because men like the Scindia and the Holkar, the Gaekwar and Bundela and Patwardhan were ready to give up their lives for Swaraj. And for that very flag, for that very Swaraj for which their fathers and grandfathers had bled, they resolved to continue uninterrupted, to the very last breath of their lives, the war already begun against those who attempted to enslave their motherland. So, they resolved to carry on the war as vigorously as ever. And again did Lakshmi Bai and the brave Tatia Tope begin to make preparations for the coming deadly fight. 
While these arrangements are going on there, we shall take a rapid glance at the activities of Brigadier Whitlock whom we had left sometime back. To reconquer the tract between the Narbada and the Ganes and the Jumna, two armies had started and, of these, the one under Sir Hugh Rose, as we had already seen, had taken Jhansi. When Jhansi was taken, the British indulged in a wholesale looting such as Nadir Shah alone had accomplished before, defiling of temples and polluting of images, and massacring terribly all alike. That finished, the army continued the campaign. The last part of the campaign had been appointed for Brigadier Whitlock to accomplish. Accordingly, Brigadier Whitlock started on the 17th of February from Jubbulpore, with all his army - European regiments, Indian regiments from Madras, "black" and white cavalry, and splendid artillery. He entered Sagar in triumph, where the loyal Raja of Oorcha joined him. The, the English army began to advance on the Nabob of Banda, the chief leader of the Revolutionaries in that province. In the beginning of the Revolution at Jhansi, Sagar, and other places, cruel massacres had taken place and the Europeans from those places ran wherever they could to save their lives. The Nabob had brought them to his palace and was looking after them well. But, at the same time, he was as busy in trying to throw off the British yoke already tottering through the shocks of the Revolution as he was in saving the lives of these Enbglishmen. From the very beginning, the symbols of slavery in his kingdom had been smashed and he was runing as 
an independent prince. Seeing the English army coming to deprive him of his liberty, the Nabob, urged and aided by the whole populace, was ready for battle. Several engagements took place between the two parties, but, being defeated in them, the Nabob started for Kalpi with his army, and Whitlock entered Banda in triumph on the 19th of April. The next march was to be on the Rao of Kirwi. 
Rao Madhav Rao of Kirwi was a child of ten and his guardianship was in the hands of the English. The Rao of Kirwi was a near relation of Baji Rao Peshwa. In 1827, Anant Rao, the then ruler of Kirwi, deposited two lakhs of Rupees with the English Government for some charities in connection with the temples of Benares. As soon as he died, the English swallowed the whole amount. More than that, they took unlawful possession of a further sum of several lakhs of Rupees foolishly deposited with them by Anant Rao's son, Vinayak Rao, in spite of the lesson he had already received. This was soon after Vinayak Rao's death. Rao Madhav, the adopted son of Vinayak Rao, being a minor, as the supervision of the whole state was in the hands of the English, and Ramachandra Rao, the chief Karbhari, had been appointed by the English, there was every reason to suppose that there would not be much fear of revolt in the Kirwi State. But, in 1857, whatever the Raos and Maharaos did was not quietly acquiesced in by the people. Sometimes obsecurely and sometimes clearly, the power of the people, the strength of the real nation, was slowly struggling into prominence. The Zemindars, the priests, the merchants of Kirwi, nay, even the common people, inspired by the strong ideal of liberty, hailed with joy the news which one day proclaimed Delhi free and the next day Lucknow and the third that Jhansi had uprooted the flags of the Feringhi. Encouraged by these hopeful incidents, they proclaimed the independence of Kirwi and the destruction of the alien yoke, not waiting for the opinion of the Rao or the sanction of his ministers. Now, while this proclamation was being loudly celebrated by the populace, the Rao, a boy of nine or ten, had not done even a single thing against the English! Nay, when the English army returned to 
Bundelkhand, he went forward to receive them and invited them into the city. According to his invitation, the English army entered the city silently, but they entered to imprison this little Rao, to destroy his capital and to pull down his palace! Dreadful looting,59 wholesale burning, and a vengeance of wickedness took place. And the State was annexed. 
Whitlock now encamped at Mahoba, in order to 'pacify' the conquered provinces. As a matter of fact, he had now completed his campaign. He had conquered all the eastern part of Bundelkhand and he had sent small expeditions to 'pacify' one or two places. So now, leaving Whitlock, let us again follow the sacred steps of the gallant Queen of Jhansi. 
The Ranee, now again full of hope, made an advance on Kunchgaon, forty-two miles from Kalpi, with the army of te Peshwa. But the Rao Sahib, if would appear, had not arranged the forces as she would have liked him to. It must be borne in mind, however, that it was not possible to make effective arrangements, either for Rao Sahib or Tatia Tope. Though in that place, the Nabob of Banda, the Raja of Shahgarh, and the Raja of Banapur had all gathered together under the same flat, they had not gathered together as the organised and disciplined parts of a grand military force, moved by oneness of heart, with a unity of plan and constitution, sustained by strict military discipline and subordination. No one could get his ideas carried out. But, in the opposing army, there was no such conflict amongst leaders. It seemed that the whole organisation was perfect and wellcontrolled. Before Sir Hugh Rose was appointed commander, there was heated discussion and difference of opinion; but, once he was the 
59 “With regard to this injustice done to Rao, Malleson has to confess : “Not a shot had been fired against him (Whitlock), but he resolved nevertheless to treat the young Rao as though he had actually opposed the British forces. The reason for this perversion of honest dealing lay in the fact that in the palace of Kirwi was stored the wherewithal to compensate soldiers for many a hard fight and many a broiling sun. In its vaults and strong rooms were specie, jewels, and diamonds of priceless value..... The wealth was coveted.” – Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, pages 140,141. 
commander, his opinion was the opinion of all. Whatever orders he issued were 
right; and, even if they were not right, they must be obeyed. And even mistaken orders of a weak general carried out by the obedient and unanimous bravery of the troops under him, become successful – are bound to become successful. On the other hand, even well-planned orders of a capable general lead to disaster and defeat, through the self-willed behaviour of the troops and the lack of oneness in command and proper subordination. 
Otherwise the rout at Kunchgaon could never have been place. As soon as Sir Hugh Road came from Jhansi, the Revolutionaries met him at Kunchgaon. Knowing that the mid-day sun was unbearable to the English, the Revolutionaries had ordered in one of their commands, “None should engage in a fight with the Feringhis before ten in the morning. The fight should begin always after ten.” This very clever rule was put into practice this day. Much havoc was thereby created in the English army as happened on many other occasions where the fight took place after ten. But, in spite of this, the Revolutionaries were defeated at Kunchgaon and retired towards Kalpi. The admirable way in which they retired, the organised manner in which they fell back has been praised very much even by the enemy.60 But then this excellent organisation came after and not before the engagement. 
60 "Then was witnessed action on the part of the rebels which impelled admiration from their 
enemies. The manner in which they conducted their retreat could not be surpassed. They 
remembered the lessons which the European officers had well taught them. There was no 
hurry, no disorder, no rushing to the rear. All was orderly as on a field-day. Though their line 
of skirmishers was two miles in length, it never wavered in a single point. The men fired, then 
ran behind the relieving men, and loaded. The relieving men then fired, and ran back in their 
turn. They even attempted, when they thought the pursuit was too rash, to take up a position, 
so as to bring on it an enfilading fire." - Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, page 124. 
With this defeat, the Revolutionaries came on to Kalpi. There, they began to make up for the defeat by wrangling against and abusing one another, - the infantry laid the defeat at the door of the cavalry, the cavalry blamed the Jhansi troops, and all together blamed the general, Tatia. 
But, Tatia Tope is not going to come any more to Kalpi to hear these wranglings. He has gone at present to the village of Charkhi, near Jalwan, to see his father. No one knows definitely where he is going after that, or whether he is going there at all. Let us remember that Gwalior lies in the direction of his road ! May the meeting between this extraordinary son and his fortunate father be full of love! And after that loving visit, may this great messenger of the Revolution go with despatch to carry out whatever designs he might have set his heart on! 
While Tatia was going on this journey, Ranee Lakshmi went to the royal tent of the Peshwa. The heroic Lakshmi relieved him of his dejection after the defeat of Kunchgaon and said to him that, if the army was properly organised, the enemy should never again be victorious. The Nabob of Banda was inspired by her speech. Proclamations in spirited language were again published in the Revolutionary army. And to-day, on the banks of the Jumna, crowds are gathering. Swords and guns, angry Sepoys invoking the Jumna to bless the cause of the indedpendence of their soil - such a Revolutionary pilgrimage the banks of the Jumna had probably never before seen. These banks are simply echoing forth the triumphant cries for the Mother and for Dharma!" Jai Jumna! With this thy sacred water in our hands, we swear that the Feringhis shall be extinct, that Swadesh shall be independent, and that Swadharma shall be re-established! Jai Jumna! If all this is accomplished, then alone we will live. If not, we will die this day on the field of battle. We swear, by thee, O Kalindi, three times!" 
Heroes, thrice bound by this oath, come on then to the field. Rao Sahib will lead the whole army. Drive away this 25th infantry under Sir 
Hugh Rose. They are all Indians - drive these traitors before you! Major Orr advances - make him share the same defeat! In this maidan before Kalpi, our position - with this undulatory part to cover - is almost impregnable. But look, the vanguard is falling back! It went too far, and being not well covered, has had to retreat. Run then, Lakshmi, run to protect them. She rushed forward sword in her hand with lightning-like rapidity, and fell on the right wing of the English, with her red-uniformed cavalry. The triumphant right stopped dead, so sudden was the attack; stopped dead, and then retired back helpless. This rapid onslaught of the girl of twenty-one, her horse at full speed, her sword cutting men down to the right and to the left, - seeing this, who would not fight for her? Who would not be inspired by her? All the Revolutionaries were inspired by her strength; the battle raged bloody and hot. The Feringhi gunners of the light field artillery began to die one after another. The Ranee and her cavalry, then, advanced right on the guns which were spitting deadly fire, and attacked the artillery. English gunners left the guns; the horse artillery was routed; the heroes of the Revolution advanced on and on, from all sides, overjoyed at the prospect of crushing the Feringhis who had so long escaped them; and before them all fought Lakshmi! 
This praise by the enemy does credit to the Panday party. 
Sir Hugh Rose, taken aback by this terrible onslaught, then advanced with his reserve camels, and the English saved their own lives, simply because of the camels. An English writter says, “Fifteen minutes more, and the mutineers would have cut us down! Fresh camels, one hundred and fifty in number, changed the fortunes of the day. Ever since that day, I have looked on the camel with eyes of affection.” By the strength of the camelmen alone, on the 22nd of May, the Feringhis succeeded in forcing the Peshwa’s army to retire towards Kalpi. After another complete defeat of the Peshwa’s troops and after a few skirmishes, Sir Hugh entered Kalpi on the 24th May. In the fort of Kalpi, the English captured a very considerable amount of military supplies which Shri Rao Sahib Peshwa and 
Tatia Tope had, with great trouble, gathered together in one year. Sixty thousand pounds of gunpowder were found buried under the ground; muskets beautifully made, brass balls of the latest type for the guns, factories for making and repairing cannon-balls, heaps of military uniforms, flags, drums, French trumpets, Howitzer guns manufactured in Europe, and arms of various kind - such was the very useful find that the English army came upon! What they did not capture was the brave and ever-memorable leaders of the Revolutionaries. For, when Kalpi fell after a week, Rao Sahib, the Nabob of Banda, Ranee Lakshmi Bai, and other leaders had left Kalpi and gone - nobody knew where. But now these unfortunate, helpless people, without an army and without arms, could do nothing beyond falling into the jaws of death, either by privations, or ny capture, or ny suicide! 
Thus Sir Colin had begun the reconquest from the northern bank of the Jumna, and went on conquering as far as the Himalayas. Sir Hugh Rose and Whitlock be.gan from the Narbada, and conquered all the country as far as the South bank of the Jumna. The English had now every reason to congratulate themselves that they had destroyed the Revolution completely. Sir Hugh Rose congratulated his army in these eloquent words :- "Soldiers, you have marched one thousand miles, captured one hundred guns, swam rivers, crossed mountains, marched through jungles, defeated big armies, reconquered extensive tracts, and reestablished the glory of your country! Brave you are; and you have also observed the strictest discipline; for courage without discipline is nought. In the midst of difficulties, temptations, and trouble, you have obeyed strictly the orders of your general, and have never showed even a single sign of insubordination. From the waters of the Narbada to the waters of the Jumna, this, your success, has come to you through your splendid discipline!" 
After publishing this glorifying proclamation, Sir Hugh resigned his charge for the sake of his health. And the triumphant English army, 
having destroyed the enemy completely, sighed the sigh of relief and wished to rest. 
But how dare you rest yet? While Tatia and Ranee Lakshmi Bai are alive, there is no rest possible for the British troops. Come, stand up! And if you would not stand of your own accord, here is the whole force of Gwalior, ready to goad you on! After escaping from Kalpi, the Revolutionary leaders went to Gopalpur to discuss their future plans. Practically, at this time, there was not a sign of hope. From the Narbada to the Jumna, and from Jumna to the Himalayas, the English had conquered back the whole territory. The Revolutionaries were without an army, without a fort, without any hope of getting fresh forces - defeated as they were again and again. But Tatia Tope was still alive, and that was enough! Tatia, too, had returned to Gopalpur. People say he had returned after visiting his father. Whatever people say, history does not say so. It was when Sir Hugh tried his deep-laid game at Kalpi that Tatia had a sudden fit of fondness for his father - a fondness, by -the-bye, which seemed to exceed even his fondness for fight; and, no longer able to control his filial feelings, he want to Charkhi to see his father. What was the secret of this sudden passion? The secret was that, as soon as Kalpi fell, it was absolutely necessary to get hold of some other strong position, some strong fortress, and some new army. And, therefore, this Messenger of the Revolution had escaped from Kalpi secretly to enter Gwalior, and see how the Revolutionary idea was progressing there! He accepted the promises of the chief officers of the army and created a new army for the Revolution, by secretly winning over the Durbar functionaries, Sirdars, and others. They promised to give him all the aid they could, and in one month he had the whole of Gwalior in the hollow of his hand. He then collected every information about the military position of Gwalior and, thus, after undermining the throne of the Scindia, Tatia returned to Rao Sahib at Gopalpur. He had 'seen his father'! Learning the glad news, that Tatia had come back from Gwalior having successfully won over the people to the sided of the Revolution, Ranee Lakshmi urged the Peshwa to advance straight towards Gwalior. On the 28th of May, the Revolutionaries came to Amin Mahal. The Mahalkars tried to stop them. They were answered, "Who are you to obstruct us? We are the Peshwa and his forces and we are fighting for Swaraj and Swadharma." These words of Rao Sahib silenced the cowards, and thousands of patriots in that part welcomes the Revolutionaries heartily, and thus the army of the Peshwa pressed right on the walls of the city of Gwalior. They had written to the Scindia, "We are coming to you in a friendly spirit. Remember our former relations. We expect help from you, so that we shall be enabled to proceed towards the south." But this ungrateful man had forgotten the former relations. Well then, remember the former and the present relations too! "The ancestors of the Scindia were our servants, our Hujres - that was the former relation. And, the present relation? The whole army of the present Scindia has joined us. Tatia had gone to Gwalior, seen the leaders, and gained all necessary information!" But still, forgetting all this the Scindia, with all his army and all his guns, advanced on the Peshwa on the 1st of June, near Gwalior. The Shrimant who deserves the respect of the whole country thought for a moment that the Scindia had repented and was coming forward to salute the flag of Swadesh. But, Lakshmi said that he was coming, not to salute, but to smash that golden flag. She came forward with her three hundred horsemen and advanced right on the guns of the Scindia. Soon, she caught the view of Jayaji Rao Scindia and his personal guard the brave 
"Bhaleghate" troops. The cobra shows not such rage when it is trodden upon as Lakshmi showed at the sight of this traitor! Like an arrow she dashed at his troops. Behold, you Bahadur - descendant of Mahadaji, this helpless girl of twenty-two, brought up in the Zenana, is inving you for a trial of strength of the sword! Let us all see now how much of the prowess of Mahadaji, the 
devoted lover of his country, has descended upon this Jayaji the devoted slave of the Feringhi! As soon as this angry lightning struck him hard on the front, his personal guards wavered and the Scindia, with all his "Bhaleghate" troops,was routed. But, at least, there was hope that his huge army and terrible artillery would do their best - and they did do their best! As soon as they saw Tatia, these troops which had been bound over by secret oaths to Tatia refused, point-blank, to fight against the Peshwa. As previously arranged, they joined the Peshwa with all their officers; the guns were silent and everyone in Gwalior honoured the flag of the Peshwa. The throne of the Scindia thus crumbled to pieces at the touch of the Revolutionary magician. 
And so, Jayaji Rao Scindia, coward as he was, and his minister, Dinkar Rao, fled, not only from the field, but from Gwalior itself, and ran to Agra! 
Gwalior, was now mad with joy. The army fired salutes in honour of the Shrimant. The Finance Minister, Amar Chand Bhatia, surrendered the whole treasury of the Scindia, to the last pie, to Shrimant. Those few patriots who were in prison under the old regime for having shown sympathy with the Revolutionaries were released from their prisons amidstthe joyous cries of the populace. The traitors who had advised the Scindia to join the English had fled, but their mansions and their property were destroyed so that not a vestige of them remained. The black charge that the Asiatics do not understand the true relation between a ruler and his subjects, was washed away completely by Gwalior. For, how can he who goes against his own country and against his own Dharma be a ruler? Poona had been in 1818 guilty of being a traitor to the motherland is not having dragged Rao Baji from his Peshwai in right time. Gwalior was not guilty of that! And therefore, this Revolution of 1857 must be recorded in history as the first indication in modern India of the omnipotence of the vox populi, the power of the people. If Scindia joins not his country, the country shall not aid him either. Swords and guns, infantry and cavalry, Durbar and Sirdars, Mankarees and citizens, temples and images - all are for the 
country, alone; and if the Scindia is not for the country, drag him down from his throne; and outside the palace, outside the capital, outside the borders of the kingdom let him be driven out! Hereafter, according to the Scriptures, "The King receives his power only by pleasing the people!" 
And now, we must not let this auspicious day, the 3rd of June, slip by uselessly. And so "a big Durbar was held in Phul Bagh. All Sirdars, statesmen noblemen, Shiledars, and cavalry officers, who had joined the Shrimant, took their seats according to their rank. Tatia Tope and the Arabs, Rohillas, Pathans, Rajputs, Rangdes, Pardeshis, and others under him came to the Durbar in their military uniform and with swords by their side. The Shrimant himself was dressed in the Peshwa's uniform Shirpana and Kalgitura on head, pearls in his ears, and pearl and diamond necklaces, round his neck. Thus, with all the paraphernalia of the Peshwai, Bhaldars and Chobdars making way for him, and Mourchas flying, the Shrimant came to the Durbar. Then, as usual, all stood up in reverence, salutes were received, and the Shrimant ascended the throne. With tears of joy in his eyes, he congratulated all the noblemen with great eloquence. Ram Rao Govind was appointed Chief Minister. Tatia Tope was made general and a sword studded with precious stones was presented to him. The eight ministers were elected. Twenty lakhs of Rupees were distributed to the army. The Durbar was a complete success. Joy was on every face and salutes of guns were fired."61 
Shrimant Rao Sahib, representative of Nana Sahib Peshwa, had thus established a new throne, infusing a new hope and a new life into the Revolutionary party, and had created a centre, a basis, round which might be attracted the scattered forces of the Revolution. Tatia Tope was not mad in busying himself with this coronation and giving salutes after salutes just 
61 D.B.Parasnis's Life of Lakshmi Bai, page 309. 
in a midst of the war. The whole world had seen the dead body of the Revolution which by this means alone he now lifted from the grave of despair. The world – some with pleasure and others with despair – had cried : “That is a dead body, there is no life in it!” But what wonderful magic this! Tatia took the dead earth at Gopalpur, he breathed on it thus, and – wonderful! – the whole world saw with the dumbness of surprise, a throne rising from the thimbleful of earth, jingling with lakhs of Rupees! Wonder of wonders! See the thousands of swordsmen advancing; hear the salutes thundering forth from the guns! A new army is up, new guns are up, Tatia has captured a new kingdom! Tatia has done all this not meely to strike the world dumb with his splendid triumph. He knew that the Revolutionaries who had spread far and wide would, on hearing the salutes proclaiming the Shrimant as a Peshwa of the Mahratta empire, get a concentrated inspiration, vigour, and hope. He knew that the sight of the triumphant flag of the nation, thus unfurled at Gwalior, would infuse an uncontrollable enthusiasm and dash. He knew that the lawlessness which had set in owing to the want of a rallying point, would now make way for discipline, through respect for the new-established throne. All this Tatia saw. And what he foresaw soon came to pass. For the body of the Panday party was soon instinct with life. While thus, on the one hand, his countrymen were encouraged, the English army, which just gave a sigh of relief, was, on the other hand, again disheartened. It was for this that the coronation was proclaimed loudly by Tatia and other leaders of the Revolution. Their deep- laid game was successful. For, by this very thunder of Tatia's cannon, Sir Hugh Rose's idea of rest was rudely shattered to pieces!62 
62 Malleson, writing about the cleverness and diplomacy which Tatia and Lakshmi Bai showed in taking Gwalior, says :- "How the "Impossible" happened has been told .... He 
(Sir Hugh Rose) realised, moreover, the great danger which would inevitably be caused by 
delay. No one could foresee the extent of evil possible if Gwalior were not promptly wrested 
from rebel hands. Grant them delay, and Tatia Tope, with the immense acquisition of political 
and military strength secured by the possession of Gwalior, and with all its resources in men, 
So far so good; but once having shocked Sir Hugh Rose and disheartened him, woe betide him who listened not to the words of Ranee Lakshmi Bai! All other functions but the one great function of war must be stopped. But it seemed that, as ill-luck would have it, the intoxication of the Revolutionaries would make them blind to the necessity of heeping the army in complete readiness. They were all immersed in luxury, good dinners, and fatal dilatoriness – they thought, perhaps, that this was the sole end of Swaraj! 
They were onlo losing Swaraj. For, the surprised Sir Hugh Rose marched rapidly on Gwalior with his excellent army under him. He brought with him the renegade Scindia and proclaimed to all that the English were going to fight only for the Scindia’s sake! It was a trick to deceive the simple men of Gwalior, who had the slavish and discreditable merit of blind loyalty, and it was calculated to prevent these from fighting against the Scindia. But the old world had changed, giving place to the new. Tatia, so far successful in awakening the Revolutionaries, 
rushed forward to meet the English. The English had already defeated the Morar contingents. Now, with the shadow of defeat on them, there began some excited movements among the Revolutionary leaders. Rao Sahib was hastening towards the house of the Nabob of Banda and the Nabob of Banda was rushing towards the house of Rao Sahib. But, in the midst of all this confusion, the Ranee alone was calm and was ready. Her sword was out. What need she fear now? Hope as well as despair she had trampled under 
money and material at his disposal, would be able to form a new army on the fragments of that 
beaten at Kalpi, and to provoke a Mahratta rising throughout India. It might be possible for 
him, using the dexterity of which he was a master, to unfurl the Peshwa's banner in the 
southern Mahratta districts. Those districts were denudedof troops, and a striking success in 
Central India would probably decide their inhabitants to pronounce in favour of the cause for 
which their fathers had fought and bled." - Malleson's Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, pages 149-150. 
foot; she treated with contempt the things on this earth; she had one aspiration alone, namely, that the flag of liberty should stand proudly erect until she gave up her last breath! Neither of them were to be in the dust; they were to lie in battle alone. So, she gave Rao Sahib a word of courage, rearranged the undisciplined troops as far as she could, and took upon herself the task of guarding the eastern gate. She only demanded, "I am ready with all my soul to do my duty; mind, you do yours!" 
She donned her usual military uniform, rode a noble steed, took out her gem-bestudded sword from the sheath, and ordered the army under her to march on. She made ready all the posts near Kotaki Serai which had been given to her care and, when the English army was in sight, everywhere, trumpets and pipes, drums and nagaras rent the air. If only she had an army, equal in courage and daring to herself! Even the insubordinate and hesitating felt heroic under her influence and, with them and her select band of horsemen, she charged hard the English army! Her two female friends, Mandar and Kashi, also fought bravely by her side. May the sweet memory of those two patriotic girls - beautiful in appearance, with male attire put on, taking pleasure in fight - live in history along with that of their mistress as long as history lives! A general like Smith was charging the Ranee's army, but to-day the Ranee's bravery and daring were a sight to see. Like lightning, she moved about all day. The English attacked the solid phalanx a number of times. One very occasion she maintained her hold firm. Her army occasionally felt enthusiastic and attacked the British and cut down many of them. At last, Smith was forced to retire; he gave up the attempt of breaking the mass and began to turn to another side, leaving the nest of the cobra alone! 
Thus closed the day and thus rose the 18th of the month! This day, the English had resolved to make desperate charges. From all directions, they advanced on the fort, and tried their utmost. General Smith, forced to retire the day before, was very determined to-day and, aided by re- inforcements, he charged the same Jhansi side he had gone for the day 
before. Sir Hugh Rose thought that his presence was also absolutely necessary and so he was personally present with the force attacking the Jhansi side. The Ranee too was ready for him with all her forces. "She 
was ready with all her soul to do her duty." That day, she wore a Chanderi turban embroidered all over, a tamamee cloak, and pyjamas. A pearl necklace was round her neck. Her famous steed being tired that day, a new, fresh-looking horse was made ready for her, fully caparisoned. While her two beautiful maids were taking sherbet, news came that the English were advancing. Lakshmi immediately darted forwarded from her tent. The arrow flies not so rapidly, the lightning flashes not forth with such force from the clouds, a lioness leaves not her lair so quickly to fall upon the approaching elephant! She rode her horse, lifted her sword, and charged the enemy with her army. As English writer says, "Immediately the beautiful Ranee went over the field and made a firm stand against the array of Sir Hugh Rose. She led her troops to repeated and fierce attacks and, though her ranks were pierced through and were gradually becoming thinner and thinner, the Ranee was seen in the foremost rank, rallying her shattered troops and performing prodigies of valour. But all was of no avail. The camel corps, pushed up by Shri Huge Rose in person, broke her last line. Still the dauntless and heroic Ranee held her own." 
But while her side was fighting with such unexampled bravery, she saw the English army advancing on her rear - for they had broken through the ranks of Revolutionaries who were holding the posts behind her! 
The artillery dumb, the main army routed, the victorious English army closing on her from all sides, with only fifteen or twenty horsemen with her, Ranee Lakshmi, accompanied by her maids, put her horse to a gallop, in order to break through the enemy, and to join her comrades on the other side. The Feringhi horsemen of the Hussars, who knew not so far where she was, fired shot after shot on her and pursued her like hounds. But the Queen, with unexampled courage, cleared her way with her sword and 
marched on. Suddenly was heard a cry, "I am dead, Bai Sahib, I am dead!" Alas, whose is this cry? Lakshmi turned round and found that it was her maid Mandar whom a white soldier had shot and killed! Angered, she attacked the Feringhi, and her blow felled him on the spot. She had avenged the death of fair Mandar! She then marched on. She came to a small rill. Now, one jump and Jhansi would have been out of the Feringhi's clutches. But her horse would not take that jump! If only she had had her old horse! As if the fiery line of a magician was round him the horse moved in circles, round and round, but would not cross. Before you could say "one", the English horsemen closed on her! Still not a word of surrender or fear! One sword against their several swords, - yet she closed on them. She crossed sword with sword with them all, but one of them hit her on the head from behind. With that blow, the right part of her head, and even her 
right eye came out - just then, another blow hit her on the chest. Oh Lakshmi, Lakshmi! The last drop of thy sacred blood is dripping and, therefore, now, Mother, take this last sacrifice for thee! Even at the point of death, she killed the British foe who had attacked her, and now the young Queen was breathing her last breath! A faithful servant, Ramchandra Rao Deshmukh, was near. He took her to a cottage near by. Ganga Das Bawa gave her cold water to drink to quench her thirst and a bed to lie down upon. Bathed in blood, this goddess of war reclined on the bed, and then her soul quietly fleeteed from her body to heaven! As soon as she was dead, Ramchandra Rao, in accordance with her dying instructions prepared a pile of grass unseen by the enemy; he put her on that pure and, before the touch of slavery could defile even her dead body, she was cremated. 
On the pyre, if not on the throne! But Lakshmi is still with her sweetheart Liberty! She has forced open the gates of death by falling in battle and has now entered the other world. Pursuit can no longer harm her. Wicked Pursuit must pass through those roaring flames before it can do so. 
Thus fought Lakshmi. She had achieved her purpose, fulfilled her ambition, carried out her resolve! One such life vindicates the whole existence of a nation! She was the concentrated essence of all virtues. A mere woman, hardly twenty-three yet, beautiful as rose, charming in her manners, pure of conduct, she had a power of organisation of her subjects, exhibited by very few, even among men. The flame of patriotism was always burning in her heart. And she proud of her country's honour and pre- eminent in war! It is very rarely that a nation is so fortunate as to be able to claim such an angelic person, as a daughter and a queen. That honour has not yet fallen to the lot of England. In the Revolution of Italy, high ideals and heroism of the very highest type are to be found; yet, in all this period of glody, Italy could not give birth to Lakshmi! 
But, even our land could hardly have given birth to such a Queen but for this glorious War of Independence! The precious pearls in the ocean are not to be found on its surface. The Suryakanta jewel does not give out flames in the quiet of the night; nor does the flint give up its spark on soft cushions. They want resistance. Injustice must make the mind restless; really, not apparently, every drop of blood most actually boil; intense national feeling is thus set aflane in such a furnace, the particles of virtue begin to flow, the test goes on, the dross is eliminated, then, the concentrated essence of virtues begins to appear. In 1857, the heart of this our Motherland took fire; then, a terrible explosion which would deafen the world took place; - A spark at Meerut, and the whole country, which, under the roller of Dalhousie, had been reduced to the monotony of a dead level and seemed to be a heap of dust, proved to be a powder-magazine filled with the most inflammable material. Just as when a mighty rocket in a fireplay, fired in the air, explodes, arrows and trees and various other picturesque objects rise and rush and burn and die away, such was the case of this gigantic Revolutionary Rocket! Its length is from Meerut to the Vindhyas; its width from Peshawar to Dumdum;- and it was fired! Fire and flames raged in all directions. Blood coming down like rain, - sieges of Delhi, 
revenges of Plassey, massacres of Cawnpore, and the Sikandar Bagh of Lucknow! Thousands of heroes are fighting - and dying; cities are burning. Kumar Singh comes, struggles, falls; the Moulvie comes, struggles, and falls; the throne of Cawnpore, the throne of Lucknow, the throne of Delhi, the throne of Bareilly, the throne of Jagadishpur, the throne of Jhansi, the throne of Banda, the throne of Furrukabad, five thousand, ten thousand, fifty thousand, a lakh of swords, flags, banners, generals, horses, elephants - all are coming out out after another, move about in the turmoil of the raging fire! Some are ascending one flame, some another; they poise themselves a while, reel, fight, fall down unseen! Everywhere battle and thunder-storms! A veritable volcanic conflagration this! And the pyre, flaming near the cottage of Gangadas Bawa, is the last and the most lustrous flame of this raging volcanic conflagration of the War of Independence of 1857! 
END OF THE THIRD PART