 May 27, 1938 
MAMATTA 
The Action That Focussed 
Savarkar In London World's Attention On India 
Savarkar Pays The Price for His | 
The Man And The Historian While the Indian Nationa Love Of Liberty! 
Movement was considered as dating from the Congress founda. 
tion, Savarkar gave historic back (By M. P. T. ACHARYA. ) 
ground to it ( supported by docu 
that had some indirect connection adding that his work would only ments from English sources ( By Buat PARMANANDA. ) The movement of India House from 
They saw his it was developing since 1757 if 
India with Barrister help them to rise. Very few of the present genera- gathered strength. The British Savarkar in London through Messrsi 'fanaticism' did not interfere with not even earlier. His theory was tion know that in 1885 Lord Government became alert. They IV. V. S. Aiyar in the India House but even helped in their personal the Mahrattas took over the leader Dufferin got the Indian National came to know that Savarkar was but never hoped or even dreamt objects. Savarkar was practical. I ship from the Moghuls and the 
wrested it from the 
company. But "What is the use of preaching un-British Congress started in order to turn the undisputed leader of this of joining their the Indian efforts to attain freedom movement. 
circumstances brought me into allayed nationalism to these fog. Mahrattas-or at least wanted to 
gies? get something done by them!" wrest it with the result that the into constitutional channels. After Savarkar was then in his early touch with him in London. 
That requires great self-control in whilom enemies united against the the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857, every twenties. He was not only qualify - Generally politicians are morose la man burning with hatred against new dangerand enemy. Even if one five or seven years there was one ing himself for the bar, but was do people but in spite of being very levery prop of British rule. 
is not willing to accept the secret movement or another aiming research work in the British severe and serious in politics V. D. But the great work of Sa var. theory, there is nothing to contro. ing at the expulsion of the foreigner | Museum for writing his War of Savarkar was a pleasant and I kar in London was not even vert it. from the country. There was the Indian Independence' which was, humorous man in private as well his political propaganda and movement of the Namdhari Sikhs later on proscribed by the Govern as a lecturer, conversationalist and namphletearing. We head 
I pamphleteering. We used to post CAVARKAR'S Hinduism was in the Punjab in 1871 to re-esta-ment. 
writer. His personal charm was now an I then political pamphlets political first and religious blish the Khalsa Raj. A few years But over and above being such that a mere shake-hand written by him in closed envelopes afterwards. That is why patriotic later the Hag of independence was student, Savarkar was the leader 
6. "Icould convert to his views such to India. Why should we not use Musalmans clustered around hoisted by V. B. Phadke in the loft 
diminando obstinate men as V. V. S. Aiyar the much vaunted British freedom him-even when they thought or Maharashtra 
Many were the young men who and 
land Har Dayal--not only convert to do things which were taboo in suspected that he remained a Path Of Constitutionalism became the votaries of the Goddess but even br For twenty years the Congress of Liberty br coming into con-them. Sincere men always become the Empire" as British sobiects 
lattached to him whether they But using freedom meant ruin for he was walked the path not only of consti- tact with Savarkar. 
ready to collaborate agreed with or differed from him. tutionalism but of moderation. The Murder Of Sir Curzon Wyllie 
life! 
intimately with anyone who stood late Lokamanya Tilak wanted to 
to 
Afr After some time Sit Curzon 
for India's liberation. Why should turn the Congress away from this w 
Wyllie was murdered by a Punjab 
NOT only men in ordinary SAVARKAR'S austerity was he otherwise admit Musalmans path. By 1906 he had created a 
e student by the name of Dhingra. 
I walks of life but even 
itself a discipline to others. I like Asaf Ali into his Abhinay strong nationalist party within the 
Sir Curzon was in charge of the those, aspiring to high offices, which easy-going people hated and Bharat Society? Congress. In 1907 occurred the line 
Indian students in England on recognised the purity of purpose in shunned. England was a country! At a time when the 1857 affair historic split at the Surat session of he 
behalf of the India Ollice. He him-although they were poles for amusement and most people was considered as a Mutiny, he the Congress. The sittings of the 
was shot down in social apart from him, and deadly wanted to make the most out of had the courage of his conviction to Congress were suspended. Doctor 
party. Savarkar was suspected opponents as regards his political it. He studied all available docu-l point out that the cartridge affair Moonje, then the right-hand man 
"Ito have complicity with that crime objectives. They even openedments at the India Office library was only a Boston Tea party while of Lokamanya Tilak, invited the 
but there was no evidence available their purse for his propa-to find out what was the truth the whole war was one for independ. Congress to Nagpur but the Gov. to the British Government Savar. Iganda. That means Savarkar had about the so-called Indian Mutiny.ence-a pioneer idea which is uni ernment banned it. Next year the 
kar's elder brother, Ganesh, was a rare tact 
si a rare tact in dealing with men of Out of the materials, he found that versally accepted in India to-day. Lokamanya was sentenced to 
at that time in Nasik. A case was every variety. In fact, he was the the mystery about the Mutiny With that discovery and propa. six years' imprisonment for sedi 
instituted against him for printing leader among Indians in London was-it was a regular war of ganda, his name is indissolubly tion. There was an outburstof 
OF a book, and he was sentenced to i while Krishnavarma could not princes and people to eject the associated. Savarkar brought the revolutionary crimes in Bengal. 
transportation for life After this deal with them in spite of his age British out of India. The Indian National idea from out of The moderate leaders met in a Con 
case was over the Collector of land experience. Savarkar had no use of greased cartridges was only its artificiality into the light of ference in Allahabad and decided 
Nasik was shot dead by some personal interest in converting and the immediate cause of the explo-organic historicism, which gives that the membership of the Con. 
"Iyoung men. One of them was convincing others and he even sion-the materials for the war strength to the idea. That is no BIC gress would be open only to those 
would be open 
use hanged and the rest were sent agreed with staunch loyalists to which lasted 3 years had accumu.mean service to India's liberation who would be faithful to the over to the Andamans. During the continue in their career-huntinglated since the battle of Plassey. I movement. Government. 
course of this trial, an approver Thus was ended the Lokamanya's stated that the revolver with which French soil at Marseilles, that means, the French Government Gems From nationalist party. Thus did the the crime was committed, had their agents would be there to could not demand his return. moderates re-establish their been sent by Savarkar from help him and that they would ask In India. Savarkar was tried and 
Savarkar's Pen ascendancy in the Congress. Some London 
for the protection of the French sentenced to transportation time before these events took 
for 
0: Savarkar In Poona Government. 
life. He remained in the Andamans place, the Lokamanya had sent 
" Shivaji is great, because his nation Escape From The Ship At the time the approver made 
for fourteen years. out a brilliant young man to Eng. 
When the proved worthy of his greatness, could land. This young man was Savar. his statement Savarkar was in When the ship carrying Savarkar penal settlement in those Islands grasp and press on his mission to kar. He had become a faithful Paris. When Savarkar wanted to touched Marseilles, he decided to was given up, Savarkar was intern- ultimate success, could realise what he disciple of the Lokamanya while come to London, his friends in carry out the plan. He went into ed at Ratnagiri in the Bombay could merely hope, could accomplish 
Presidency and passed another four. what he merols aspired to." yet a student in the Fergusson Paris advised him against that the bath-room of the ship, and Presidency and passed another four. College in Poona. 
step, as they thought that his through a hole in the teen years there. He was released 
arrest was unavoidable. But he room slipped out into the by the orders of the Interim Minis. "The strongest castle that a nation The India House 
would not listen to them. He came sea. He swam for half-a-try, of which Mr. Jamnadas Mehta determined to win its independence In London he stayed at the back to England and at the Rail mile, chased by the police in a was a member, last year. He had 
He had can have is the castle of its heart, its 
ideal is its flag and wherever it flies India House. As early as 1906 he way station in London was arrested boat, and not only touched the gone to jail at the age of twenty 
there lies its capital.” raised India's flag of freedom in by the Bombay police who had French soil but reached and stood six; he became a free man once England. 
come over to England for this very lon the French mainland. But more at the age of fifty-four. He has 
1 " The most irresistible eloquence in The India House had been purpose. His movements in Paris alas! No help was there. His paid for his love of liberty by him.shia bought by Pt. Shya mji Krishan had been under strict watch and Paris friends evidently wanted to self being in confinement during marrie Varma, and used by him to house the Police evidoftly knew of the save the few pounds which send the best years of his life, Indian students in London so that time of his arrival in London.jing help to Marseilles would have Savarkar's Vision And Greatness " Although fetters of political it would be the centre of move. Sayarkar raised the question of the meant. The intrepid Savarkarl S... 
llegality of his extradition in the sought the protection of a French Pnnjab was called upon to honour superstition are often found far more 
Such is the man whom the slavery can at times be shaken off and ment for India's freedom. I stayed legality of his extradition in the sought the protection of a Fren 
smashed, yet the fetters of cultural for sometime in the India House, British 
courts, but he could not policeman but what did he know in courts, but he could not policeman but what did he know 
the first week of Mahatma Gandhi 
May. difficult to knock-oil." of international law ? This police- The at this time succeed in his plea. 
The flame of patriotism burns in came to London as a mem- While this question was before man made him over to the u 
Iman made him over to the British him as brightly in 1938 as it did ber of 
- Sambhaji by his great martyr the deputation 
police. Savarkar WAS caged all in 1906. As a young man in his dom, not only preserved but added im. to the courts, the Paris Indians sent police. present the case of Indians in word to Savarkar that during the the more strictly and taken to twenties 
otwenties, he risked his all for mensely to the brilliance and strength South Africa. He also stayed in the course of his journey to India, he India. 
the sake of his country at of Shivaji's moral and India House. But at that time I should manage 
spiritual to touch the Significance Of The Escape a time when the Con-gains." Mahatmaji was the disciple of 
Igress leaders were Dadabhai Nawroji 
Savarkar's escape at allegiance 
swearing - and Gopal 
allegiance 
to to the 
the established sou 
established sounding catchwords hold the field, Krishna Gokhale and was a con 
Marseilles fucussed the 
the Government. He does not think in Savarkar invites the firmed moderate. He did not like 
world's attention on In-h 
country to 
1h the time-honoured old either the talks with Pt. Shya mji 
dia's problem. No other Lil 
grooves. face the facts and work for Swaraj 
Like a true leader he does his own the Raj' in which our Swatwa' Krishna Verma or the atmosphere 
single act of an Indian thi 
" thinking and of India House. So he shifted from 
had ever before or hasf 
creates his own has the most unfettered chance of 
following. At a time when high- development. that place and went to a hotel. 
ever since been instru. mental in bringing the Indian case before the bar of world opinion. The Indians in Paris made representations to the French Government and the French Govern ment demanded back the body of Savarkar, as they held the arrest of Savarkar by the British Police on the French soil to be illegal. The matter was referred to the In ternational Court at the Hague, The Court held the arrest to be illegal, but decided that once 
Savarkar was under the Mr. MANDLIK and SAVARKAR | SAVARKAR photographed just at the time eustody of the British 
at Pen ( Kolaba District ) 
of his release from Ratnagiri. through whatsoerer 
SAVARKAR honoured by Bombay students