 PUBLISHER’S NOTE 
Most historians, British as well as Indian, have described and dismissed the 
rising of 1857 as a ‘Sepoy Munity’ or at best ‘The Indian Mutiny’. Indian revolution is on 
the other hand, and national minded leaders thinkers have regarded it as a planned and 
organised olitical and military rising aimed at destroying the British power in India. 
Mr. Sawarkar’s is an attempt to look at the incidents of 1857 from the Indian 
point of view. A leading revolutionary himself, was attracted and inspired by the burning 
zeal, the heroism, bravery, suffering and tragic fate of the leaders of 1857, and he decided to 
re-interpret the story and to relate it in full with the help of all the material available to him at 
the time. He spent days and months at the India Office Library studying the period. Finally, 
his work was published in 1909, under the title “The Indian War of Independence –1857”. 
The full story of its publication and eventual fate is related, at length, elsewhere in this 
volume. We shall only mention here that its entry into India was banned by the Government 
even before it was published. This ban was finally lifted by the Congress Government of 
Bombay in May 1946, and this is the first authorised edition of the book to be published in 
India. 
As the publishers of this edition we take here the opportunity of recording our 
sense of gratitute to Mr.G.M.Joshi, editor of the Marathi weekly journal Agrani, for making 
this work available to us, and for his continued interest in it while it was going through the 
press. But first of all, we are indebted to Mr. Savarkar himself for letting us publish this book. 
For, ever since the ban on it was lifted the public has been eagerly waiting for it to reappear. 
We consider it a matter of pride that we should be permitted to present it to the public. 
The publication of this edition in the present form would hardly have been 
possible but for the hearty co-operation of many of our friends. First among these is our artist 
friend Mr.M.G.Godse, who not only planned and supervised the entire lay-out and get-up of 
the book, but took more than mere professional interest in the whole work. 
The value of this edition is further enhanced by the many rare photographs and 
pictures kindly lent by Mr.R.M.Athawale from his special “Sattavani Collection” which is 
intended for his forthcoming work, in Marathi, on 1857. He has spent years in studying the 
subject, and has taken a good deal of trouble to collect the material for his work. It is because 
his high respect for Mr. Savarkar and his special regard for Mr. Savarkar’s history of 1857 
that he has lent his material to us. Among the pictures lent by him, the one of Maharaja Jayaji 
Rao Scindia of Gwalior, and those of two of Rani of Jhansi’s cannons were given him by the 
Archaeological Department of Gwalior State for suitable use. We are thankful to Mr. 
Athawale for allowing us to use of these also. 
We are also thankful to Mr. Purav, photographer; Mr. H.S.Dhargalkar, of 
India Block Co.; Mr. D.D.Neroy, Block-maker; Mr.M.V.Kamat, of Bombay Process Studio; 
and to the Industrial Art Studio, Bombay. They all went out of their way to execute our work 
at the shortest notice and without the least hesitation. Last of all, we must thank the printers 
and other workers of the Karnatak Printing Press for the care and despatch with which they 
handled the work. 
THE STORY OF THIS HISTORY 
“ An honest tale speeds best 
By being plainly told.” - Shakespeare 
Apart from the splendid merits of the subject matter dealt with in the warlit 
pages of this history of “The Indian War of Independence of 1857”, the story of the thrilling 
vicissitudes through which this book had to pass does by itself entitle it to be placed on the 
classical shelf in any world library. 
The Object and the Name of the Book 
Veer Savarkarji, the famous author of this book, did himself explain in an 
article in the “Talwar”, an organ of the Abhi Nava Bharat Revolutionary Society, which was 
started by him and published in Paris, that his object in writing this history was, subject to 
historical accuracy, to inspire his people with a burning desire to rise again and wage a 
second and a successful war to liberate their motherland. He also expected that the history 
should serve to place before the revolutionists an outline of a programme of organisation and 
2 
action to enable them to prepare the nation for a future war of liberation. It would never have 
been possible to preach such a revolutionary gospel publicly throughout India or carry 
conviction so effectively as an illuminating illustration of what had actually happened in the 
nearest past would do. So he invoked the warriors of 1857 to deliver his message through 
their own mighty words and mightier deeds. 
The ideal of absolute political Independence, and the conviction that the 
ultimate and inevitable means to realize that ideal could be no other than an armed national 
revolt against the foreign domination.- were concepts which in those days – lay even beyond 
the horizon of the then political thought and action in India. The very mention of them was 
brushed aside as chimerical by the then extremists, was denounced as criminal by the loyal 
moderates and was even anathematised as immoral by the half-witted moralists ! But these 
self-same concepts formed the two fundamental tenets of the A.N.B. (Abhi Nava Bharat) 
Revolutionary organisation. “Reforms and a peaceful solution” formed the alpha and omega 
of the ambition of the then Indian National Congress itself. Independence, Revolution- let 
alone a War for Independence – were as a rule words almost unknown, unheard and 
inconceivably incomprehensible even to the highly patriotic Indian world. It was to familiaze 
this Indian patriotic world with at least these words in daily thought, and by their constant 
repetition, like that of a ‘Mantram’, to hypnotize the youthful political mind into a sub- 
conscious attraction for the noble concepts, which the words connoted – that Savarkar, who 
as a Historian would have called this book a history of the ‘National Rising’ or of the 
‘Revolutionary War of 1857’, did, of a set design, name it the history of “The Indian War of 
Independence of 1857.” 
Veer Savarkar always emphasized the necessity in the Indian condition of 
carrying politics and patriotism to the camp, to the military forces in India, for rendering any 
armed revolt practical. The history of the Revolutionary War of 1857 proved beyond cavil or 
criticism that only some fifty years previously our ancestors had aimed to achieve absolute 
political independence, could bring about the active and armed participation in the National 
struggle of the military forces and could wage an inexorable war for the liberation of our 
motherland. He consequently felt that this history it told viewing it through such a 
revolutionary perspective was most likely to animate the rising generation of India with the 
faith that there was no reason why it should not be practicable and even more faithful to try 
again as, at any rate, there was no other way to salvation. How far this expectation of the 
author was realized will be seen as this story proceeds. 
3 
Originally written in Marathi 
This book was written originally in Marathi, in 1908, when Veer Savarkar was 
about twenty-four years of age. Some select chapters used to be reproduced in English, in 
speeches which Veer Savarkarji usedd to deliver at the open weekly meetings of the Free 
India Society in London. Perhaps through this channel or otherwise the detectives got some 
scent of the subject-matter of this book which their reports dubbed as revolutionary, explsive 
and highly treasonous. Soon a chapter or two of the Marathi manuscript were found missing, 
which, it was disclosed later on, were stolen by the detective agents, and found their way to 
the Scotland Yard, the headquarters of the British Intelligence Department in London. 
Nevertheless, the Marathi manuscript was sent to India by the revolutionists so secretly and 
cleverly that, foiling the strict vigilance of the customs authorities of the Indian Ports, it 
reached safely its destination. But the leading press-concerns in Maharashtra dared not run 
the risk of printing the volume. At last, the owner of a printing firm who was himself a 
member of the Abhi Nava Bharat Secret Society undertook to publish it. In the meanwhile, 
the Indian police too got some vague information that the volume was being published in 
Marathi. They, thereupon, carried a number of simultaneous surprise raids on some 
prominent printing houses in Maharashtra. But fortunately, the owner of the Press, where the 
book was being actually printed got a hint through a sympathetic Police Officer and 
succeeded in smuggling out the Marathi manuscript to a safer place just before the search 
party arrived. The manuscript was later on sent back to Paris, instead of to London, and fell 
into the hands of its author. 
Finding thus that it was impossible to get it printed in India, it was decided to 
get the Marathi book printed in Germany, where some Sanskrit literature used to be published 
in the Nagari script. But after a lot of waste of money and time, the scheme had to be given 
up as hopeless, owing to the uncouth and ugly Nagari type cast in Germany, and to the fact 
that the German compositors were absolutely ignorant of the Marathi language. 
The History translated into English 
4 
The A.N.B. Revolutionary Party resolved thereupon to publish, at least, the 
English Translation of this History of the Indian War of Independence of 1857 with a view to 
enabling the English speaking public, both in India and outside, to know its contents. A few 
highly intellectual Maratha youths in London, members of the A.N.B., distinguished 
graduates of Indian Universities studying Law, and candidates for the I.C.S. Examination, 
volunteered to translate the voluminous work into English. After the translation was complete 
under the supervision of Sriyut V.V.S.Aiyer, efforts were made to get it printed in England. 
But the British detectives, too, were not idle, and made it impossible for any British printer to 
undertake the publication of it for fear of being prosecuted forthwith. The English manuscript 
was then sent to Paris; but the French Government at that time was so thoroughly under the 
thumb of England, with whom France had to ally herself in order to face combinedly the 
impending danger of a German invasion that the French detectives were working hand in 
hand with the British police to suppress the A.N.B. revolutionary activities in France; and 
under their threat, even a French printer could not be found ready to run the risk of printing 
this history. At last by a successful ruse, the revolutionists persuaded a printing firm in 
Holland to print the book. The British Intelligence Department continued to grope in the dark, 
as the revolutionists publicly gave it out that the English translation was being printed in 
France. Before the British detectives could get any inkling, the volume was printed in 
Holland and the whole edition of the English translation was smuggled into France and kept 
secretly ready for distribution. 
In the meanwhile, before the book was sent to Holland for getting it printed, 
the British and the Indian Governments got so nervous, and dreaded so much the effects of 
Savarkar’s writings that they proscribed the book which they admitted was not yet printed ! 
This was so high-handed a step on their part that the English papers themselves resented this 
action of proscribing a book before its publication- a case almost unprecedented in a land 
which boasted of its Freedom of the Press. Veer Savarkar also did not spare the Governments 
and poured vials of ridicule on the proscribing order in a spirited letter which he wrote to 
“The London Times”. He challenged in it, “It is admitted by the authorities that they were not 
sure whether the manuscript had gone to print. If that is so, how does the Government know 
that the book is going to be so dangerously seditious as to get it proscribed before its 
publication, or even before it was printed? The Government either possess a copy of the 
manuscript or do not. If they have a copy, then why did they not prosecute me for sedition as 
that would have been the only course legitimately left to them? On the contrary, if they have 
no copy of the manuscript how could they be so cocksure of the seditious nature of a book of 
5 
which they do not know anything beyond some vague, partial and unauthenticated reports?” 
The “London Times” not only published the letter, but added a note of its own that the very 
fact that the Government should have felt it necessary to have recourse to such presumably 
high-handed and extraordinary executive steps proved that there must be “Something very 
rotten in the State of Denmark.” 
After getting the English translation printed in Holland, the revolutionists 
smuggled into India hudreds of its copies by ingenious devices. Many of them were wrapped 
in artistic covers specially printed with such innocuous and bogus names as “Pickwick 
Papers,” “Scot’s Works,” “Don Quixote” etc. Several copies got smuggled in bozes with false 
bottoms. It will be interesting to note that one such box, containing a number of copies under 
a false bottom, was taken into India by a youthful member of the Abhi Nava Bharat named 
Shikandar Hayat Khan who later on was known to fame as Sir Shikandar Hayat Khan, the 
chief minister of the Punjab. Even vigilance of the Argus-eyed monster of the Bombay 
Customs House failed to spot these dedvices and thousands of copies did thus reach their 
destination in India addressed to many prominent leaders, members of Abhi Nava Bharat, 
leading libraries, colleges and especially to secret sympathisers who had access to several 
military camps throughout India. All these copies of this first edition of this history were sent 
free, even the postal charges being defrayed by the A.N.B.Revolutionary Society. It was then 
openly published in France, was freely circulated and widely read by leading English 
historians, politicians and revolutionary circles especially in Ireland, France, Russia, 
America, Egypt and Germany. 
The “Gadar” in America and the second English Edition. 
In the year 1910, the British and the Indian Governments launched a violent 
campaign of persecutions and prosecutions with a view to crushing the Abhi Nava Bharat 
Secret Society. Several Indian revolutionaries were hanged; several transported for life; 
hundreds sentenced to terms extending from ten to fourteen years of rigorous imprisonment. 
The heroic story of Veer Savarkar’s arrest, escape, re-arrest, persecution, prosecutions and 
consequent trfansportation to the Andamans for two life-sentences amounting to at least fifty 
year’s imprisonment, is well-known to be recited here. 
No sooner did the Abhi Nava Bharat organisation recover from this stunning 
blow than Madam Cama, the well-knopwn brave Parsi lady, Lala Hardayal, Chattopadhyaya 
6 
and other leaders of the A.N.B.Revolutionary Party decided to bring out the second English 
edition of this book. Lala Hardayalji organised the American branch of the A.N.B. and started 
his well-known newspaper “The Gadar”-(Rebellion) in America. Not only was the second 
English edition of this Indian War of Independence of 1857 published this time for regular 
sale to replenish the party funds; but translations of this history were published the party 
funds; but translations of this History were published regularly in Urdu, Hindi and Punjabi 
languages secretly through the “Gadar”. It aroused the Sepoys in the Army, as the “Gadar” 
reached several camps in India and especially the large number of the Sikh agriculturists 
settled in America. Soon after that, the First World War broke out. How the Indian 
revolutionists in India and outside joined hands with the Germans against England, how large 
amounts of arms and ammunitions were smuggled into India, how the ‘Komagatamaru’ 
succeeded in landing revolutionary forces in India, how the Emden bombarded Indian ports,. 
How mutinies broke out in Indian regiments stationed at Hong Kond, Singapore, and Burma 
under the leadership of Gadar party and how this attempt by the Indian revolutionaries to 
invade India to liberate her was at last frustrated owing to the defeat of the Germans, is now a 
matter of history. Nevertheless, this revolutionary campaign proved to be a veritable rehearsal 
of the recent Military Invasion attempted on a mightier scale by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose 
with the I.N.A. Throughout this later revolutionary movement, it became evident from the 
trials of hundreds of leaders and followers that this history of the first Indian War of 
Independence of 1857 proved to be a perennial source of inspiration, and even provided a 
detailed sketch of the programme of action. The demand for its copies was so great that they 
used to be sold and resold, in cases, for such fabulolus prices as 300 Rupees each. Thousands 
of the arrested revolutionaries were found in possession of them, and possession of a copy of 
this book was taken to be a proof by itself of the complicity of the possessor in the 
revolutionary activities. 
“The Original Marathi Book is Dead!- Long live the book!!” 
After the arrest of Veer Savarkar the manuscript of the original Marathi book 
was handed over to Madam Cama in Paris. She kept it in her safe in the Bank of France with 
a view to placing it beyond the reach of the Agents of the British Intelligence Department. 
But the invasion of France by the Germans threw the Government of France itself into a 
hopeless disorder. Madam Cama too, passed away. Consequently, when a searching enquiry 
was made regarding the whereabouts of the book no trace of the manuscript could be found. 
7 
The great Marathi tome was lost- no hope of its recovery was left. Marathi literature had thus 
suffered an irreparable loss. 
The Third Known English Edition of the History 
As we are noting down only those editions of which we have definite 
knowledge, leaving out of count those of which rumour alone informs us, the next English 
edition we must take cognizance of, is that which, after the re-emergence of the revolutionary 
party on an all India basis, was printed and published in two parts, of course secretly, under 
Veer Bhagatsing’s lead. It was sold widely at high prices and the proceeds went to swell the 
party funds. The few copies, almost religiously preserved even at the risk of prosecution and 
persecution, which can be rarely found even to-day, belong, in the main, to this edition. The 
conspiracy cases which followed the arrest of Veer Bhagatsing and his leading comrades 
revealed the fact that copies of this book were found in searches in the possession of almost 
all the accused and that this History animated them to face martyrdom and guided them to 
chalk out the revolutionary programme- to organise an armed revolt to liberate our 
motherland ! The Indian National Army organised by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose 
and the Fifty English Edition. 
The well-ascertained fifth edition came to light in the days when the last and 
the most determined efforts was made to organize an army on the large scale, yet recorded, to 
invade India to free her from the British bondage, by Rash Bihari Bose, the President of the 
Hindu Maha Sabha branch in Japan, and which army was later on commanded by Netaji 
Subhas Chandra Bose. Unimpeachable evidence recorded by patriots and warriors who took 
an actual part in the invasion shows that this ‘History’ was read and re-read in their camps 
and was looked upon as a veritable text-book for the soldiers and officers in the army. A stray 
copy of a Tamil edition was also ransacked. Its tattered pages were glued and the volume was 
rebound and circulated in the army. But it is not known when or by whom the Tamil 
translation was made and published. 
The Sixth English Edition to Challenge the Ban on the Book 
8 
While throughout the last thirty or forty years the revolutionists were thus 
bringing out secretly, edition after edition of this history, an open public agitation was also 
ging on in India demanding the raising of the Governmental ban not only on this history but 
on several other books written by Veer Savarkar. Public meetings and protests made by 
literary societies went unheeded by the British Government in England as well as in India. 
Even when the so called National ministries formed by the Congressites came to power some 
ten years ago, they too did not raise the ban on Savarkarite literature as perhaps, it not only 
did not countenance but positively denounced the vagaries of the half-witted and even 
immoral doctrine of absolute non-violence to which the Congressites swore only verbal 
allegiance. But when the recent World War II was over and the present Congressite ministries 
came into power, the public demand for the raising of this ban grew so unruly that some 
enthusiastic patriots threatened to challenge and break the ban. They raised funds and secretly 
printed a new English edition in Bombay with a view to selling it openly and publicly 
courting arrests. They even informed the Congressite ministers of their intention. 
The Ban Raised at Last after some Forty Years of Proscription. 
When matters came to this pass and as the Government too was inclined to 
reconsider the question, the ban on Savarkarite literature as a whole, which continued to be 
proscribed for some forty years in the past, was raised by the Congressite ministry at long 
last, upon which sane act they deserve to be congratulated. 
“The Book became the Bible of the Indian Revolutionists” 
It will be evident from the story as recited above that the book continued to be 
regarded as a veritable Bible by the Indian Revolutionists ever since the armed struggle for 
Indian Independence initiated by the Abhi Nava Bharat bands down to recent times when 
full-fledged armies marched to the battle-fields under Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. Directly 
and indirectly the book has influenced, animated and guided at least two generations in India 
in their struggles to free the Motherland. That is why the Nation itself made it a point of 
honour to keep the book alive as a national asset in defiance of the violent efforts of the 
foreign government to suppress and kill it. Its survival despite of it all is almost miraculous. 
Miraculous too is the survival of its illustrious author who, in spite of untold 
sufferings and sacrifices, trials, tribulations and transportations, has been spared by 
9 
Providence to witness the triumphant march of the Revolutionary principles and programmes 
which he as a SEER preached and as a WARRIOR fought to carry out. 
The Book Pays out National Debt to the Memory of the Warriors of 1857 
We cannot do better than to quote Shrijut Subbarao, the gifted editor of the 
‘Gosthi’ to illustrate the above truth : 
“ The British Raj in India has treated Savarkar’s book as most dangerous for 
their existence here. So it has been banned. But it has been read by millions of our 
countrymen including my humble self. In trying to elevate the events of 1857, which 
interested Historians and Administrators had not hesitated to call for decades as an ‘Indian 
Mutiny’, to its right pose of ‘Indian War of Independence’. All be it a foiled attempt at that ! 
It is not a work of a Patriotic Alchemist turning base mutineering into noble revolutionary 
action. Even in these days what would the Mahatmic school have called the efforts of Subhas 
Bose’s Azad-Hind-Fouj if Savarkar’s alchemy had not intervened ? True. Both the 1857 and 
1943 ‘Wars’ have ended in failure for our country. But the motive behind- was it mere 
Mutineering or War for Independence ? If Savarkar had not intervened between 1857 and 
1943, I am sure that the recent efforts of the Indian National Army would have been again 
dubbed as an Ignoble Mutiny effectively crushed by the valiant British-cum-Congress arms 
and armlessness. But thanks to Savarkar’s book Indian sense of a “Mutiny” has been itself 
revolutionised. Not even Lord Wavell, I suppose, can now call Bose’s efforts as a Mutiny. 
The chief credit for the change of values must go to Savarkar- and to him alone. But the 
greatest value of Savarkar’s Book lies in its gift to the Nation of that Torch of Freedom in 
whose light an humble I and a thousand other Indians have our dear daughters named after 
Laxmibai, the Rani of Jhansi. Even Netaji Bose in a fateful hour had to form an army corps 
named after Rani of Jhansi. But for Savarkar’s discovery of that valiant heroine, Rani of 
Jhansi should have been a long-for-gotten ‘Mutineer’ of the nineteenth century.” 
- Free Hindusthan, Sopecial, 28th May, 1946 
This history has literally resurrected from continuing to be entombed in 
oblivion the spirits of the bravest of the leaders, warriors and martyrs who fell fighting in 
1857, and taught us to pay our admiring and loyal tribute to Nana Sahib, Bala Rao, Kumar 
Singh, Mangal Pande, Ahmad Shah, the Queen of Jhansi, Senapati Tatia Tope and hosts of 
10 our warriors. The names could never have been on the lips of millions today but for the 
researches of Veer Savarkar guided by a gifted intuition and on a par with such excavationas 
at Mohenjodaro. It cannot but be a source of satisfaction to Veer Savarkarji that the 
expectations he cherished about this History, when he wrote it in his youth, should have been 
realised before his eyes. But we are afraid that his satisfaction in this case must be only 
partial. For he never could conceive that the ‘Rising of 1857’ was an event complete by itself. 
He looked upon the war of 1857 as but a campaign in the war of Independence in its entirety. 
He did not, therefore, mean the book to serve as merely the annals of the past but also as a 
source of inspiration and guidance to the Future. Consequently he must be expecting this 
History to continue to discharge its mission yet further till the end in view is accomplished. 
This end is clearly marked out by Veer Savarkar himself as the following page will show. 
The special tribunal, which tried him in 1910 for waging war against the Kind 
(of course of England !) and sentenced him to transportation for life and forfeiture of his 
property, quotes in its judgment as an overwhelming proof of his ‘guilt’ the following 
statement issued by Savarkar in 1908 from London : 
“The war begun on the 10th of May 1857 is not over on the 10th of May 1908, nor can it ever cease till a 10th of May to come sees the destiny accomplished and out 
Motherland stands free !” 
G.M.JOSHI 
Bombay: 10th January,1947 
THE ORIGINAL PUBLISHER’S PREFACE 
This book on the history of 1857 was originally written in an Indian 
vernacular. But owing to the unique nature of the book which for the first time ever since the 
great War was fought, proves from the English writers themselves that the rising of the Indian 
people in 1857 was in no way an insignificant chapter in, or a tale unworthy of, a great 
people’s history, pressing requests were made from many quarters to translate the work into 
the English language, so that, by translations into the other vernaculars, the whole of the 
Indian nation might be enabled to read the history of the ever memorable War of 1857. 
Realising the reasonableness and importance of these requests and with the kind permission 
11 
of the author the publishers undertook the translation of the original into the English 
language. With the patriotic co-operation of many of their countrymen, they are able to-day 
to place this work in the hands of Indian readers. 
The work of translating an Oriental work into a western tongue has ever been 
a task of immense difficulty, even when the translator has all the facilities which leisure and 
training could afford. But when the translation had to be done by divers hands and within a 
very short time, it was clearly foreseen by the publishers that the translation would be 
defective and unidiomatic. But the main point before the publishers was not to teach the 
Indian people how to make an elegant translation nor to show them how to write correct 
English – points to which they were supremely indifferent- but to let them show how their 
nation fought for its Independence and how their ancestors died “for the ashes of their fathers 
and the temples of their Gods.” So, the publishers decided to run the risk of publishing the 
book as soon as it could explain the facts it had to tell, though none could be more conscious 
of the faults of the language than they themselves. Fifty years have passed and yet those who 
died for the honour of their soil and race are looked upon as madmen and villains by the 
world abroad ; while their own kith and kin for whom they shed their blood, are ashamed 
even to own them ! To allow this state of public opinion, born of stupid ignorance, and 
purposely and systematically kept up by a band of interested hirelings, to continue any 
longer, would have been a national sin. So, the publishers have not waited till the language of 
this translation could be rendered elegant. Which would be more shameful- to let hideous 
calumny hover over and smother down the spirit of martyrdom, or to let some mistake creep 
into a book admittedly translated into a foreign tongue? The first, at the best, was a crime, 
and the second at the worst a venial literary offence. Therefore, the publishers owe no 
apology to, nor would one be asked for by, the Indian readers for whose special benefit, the 
work is published. 
But, to those sympathetic foreign readers who might be inclined to read this 
book, we owe an apology for the faults of the language and crave their indulgence for the 
same. 
THE PUBLISHERS 
LONDON, MAY 10, 1909 
12 
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 
Firty years having passed by, the circumstances having changed, and the 
prominent actors on both sides being no more, the account of the War of 1857 has crossed the 
limits of current politics and can be relegated to the realms of history. 
When, therefore, taking the searching attitude of an historian, I began to scan 
that instructive and magnificent spectacle, I found to my great surprise the brilliance of a War 
of Independence shining in “the mutiny of 1857”. The spirits of the dead seemed hallowed by 
martyrdom,. And out of the heap of ashes appeared forth sparks of a fiery inspiration. I 
thought that my countrymen will be most agreeably disappointed, even as I was, at this deep- 
buried spectacle in one of the most neglected corners of our history, if I could but show this 
13 
to them by the light of research. So, I tried to do the same and am able to-day to present to 
my Indian readers this startling but faithful picture of the great events of 1857. 
The nation that has no consciousness of its part has no future. Equally true it is 
that a nation must develop its capacity not only of claiming a past but also of knowing how to 
use it for the furtherance of its future. The nation ought to be the master and not the slave of 
its own history. For, it is absolutely unwise to try to do certain things now irrespective of 
special considerations, simply because they had been once acted in the past. The feeling of 
hatred against the Mahomedans was just and necessary in the times of Shivaji- but, such a 
feeling would be unjust and foolish if nursed now, simply because it was the dominant 
feeling of the Hindus then. 
As almost all the authorities on which this work is based are English authors, 
for whom it must have been impossible to paint the account of the other side as elaborately 
and as faithfully as they have done their own, it is perfectly possible that many a scene, other 
than what this book contains, might have been left unstated, and many a scene described in 
this book might be found to have been wrongly described. But if some patriotic historian 
would go to northern India and try to collect the traditions from the very mouths of those who 
witnessed and perhaps took a leading part in the War, the opportunity of knowing the exact 
account of this can still be caught, though unfortrunately it will be impossible to do so before 
very long. When, within a decade or two, the whole generation of those who took part in that 
war shall have passed away never to return, not only would it be impossible to have the 
pleasure of seeing the actors themselves, but the history of their actions will have to be left 
permanently incomplete. Will any patriotic historian undertake to prevent this while it is not 
yet too late ? 
Even the slightest reference and the most minute details in this book can be as 
much substantiated by authoritative works as the important events and the main currents of 
the history. 
Before laying down this pen, the only desire I want to express is that such a 
patriotic and yet faithful, a more detailed and yet coherent, history of 1857 may come 
forward in the nearest future from an Indian pen, so that this my humble writing may soon be 
forgotten ! 
14 
THE AUTHOR 
LIST OF IMPORTANT BOOKS CONSULTED 
ARNOLD,SIR EDWIN, K.C.I.E.- The Marquis of Dalhousie’s Administration of British 
India. 
BALL, CHARLES- The History of the Indian Mutiny. 
COOPLAND, MRS.- A lady’s Excape from Gwalior. 
DUFF, DR.ALEXANDER- The Indian Rebellion: Its Causes and Results in a series of 
Letters. 
EYRE, SIR VINCENT- Letters and Despatches. 
FORBES-MITCHELL, WILLIAM- Reminiscences of the Great Mutiny, 1857-59. 
FORGETT- Real Danger in India. 
FORREST,GEORGE WILLIAM- State Papers (Several Series). 
15 
GRANT,SIR JAMES HOPE- Incidents in the Sepoy War,1857-58. (Compiled from the 
privvate journals of Sir Hope Grant..... together with explanatory chapters by 
H.Knollys). 
GUBBINS,MARTIN RICHARD- An Account of the Mutinies in Oudh and the Siege of the 
Lucknow Residency. 
HOLLOWAY- Essays on the Indian Mutiny. 
HOLMES- History of the Indian Mutiny. 
JACOB,SIR GEORGE LE GRANT- Western India before and during the Mutinies: pictures 
drawn from life. 
KAYE, SIR JOHN WILLIAM- A History of the Sepoy War in India, 3 vols. 
KAYE AND MALLESON- History of the Indian Mutiny, 6 vols. 
KHAN, MU’IN AL-DIN HASAN- Two Native Narratives. 
LECKEY, EDWARD- Fictions Connected with the Indian Outbreak of 1857 Exposed. 
LOWE, THOMAS, M.R.C.S.- Central India during the Rebellion of 1857. 
MALLESON, G.B.-Red Pamphlet. 
MARTIN,WILLIAM- Why is the English Rule Odious to the Natives of India? 
MEAD,HENRY- The Sepoy Revolt: Its Causes and Consequences. 
MEDLEY, JULIUS GEORGE- A Year’s Campaigning in India from Marcfh 1857 to March 
1858. 
METCALFE- Native Narratives. 
ROBERTS,LORD- Forty-one Years in India. 
RUSSEL, SIR WM.HOWARD- My Diary in India in the year 1958-59, 2 vols. 
SHEPHERD- Personal Narrative of Cawnpore. 
SYLVESTER- Recollections. 
TAYLER,WILLIAM- The Patna Crisis. 
TAYLOR,MEADOWS- The Story of My Life. 
THOMSON, MOWBRAY- The Story of Cawnpore. 
TRAVELYAN, SIR GEORGE OTTO- Cawnpore. 
WHITE- Complete History of the Great Sepoy War. 
WILSON- The Defence of Lucknow. State Papers and several other books. 
ANON- History of the Siege of Delhi, by an Officer who served there. 
ANON- Military Narrative. 
16 
ANON- Narrative of the Indian Revolt,etc. Reprinted from the “Illustrated Times.” 
िशपायाच बड – वनायक क डदव ओक (मराठ ) 
िशपाई य दर इितहास – (बगाली) 
झाशी या राणीच च रऽ – पारसनीस 
गोडस याचा ‘माझा ूवास’ – व ानी ूकािशलल 
