 PUBLISHER’S NOTE 
Most historians, British as well as Indian, have described and dismissed the 
rising of 1857 as a ‘Sepoy Munity’ or at best ‘The Indian Mutiny’. Indian revolution is on 
the other hand, and national minded leaders thinkers have regarded it as a planned and 
organised olitical and military rising aimed at destroying the British power in India. 
Mr. Sawarkar’s is an attempt to look at the incidents of 1857 from the Indian 
point of view. A leading revolutionary himself, was attracted and inspired by the burning 
zeal, the heroism, bravery, suffering and tragic fate of the leaders of 1857, and he decided to 
re-interpret the story and to relate it in full with the help of all the material available to him at 
the time. He spent days and months at the India Office Library studying the period. Finally, 
his work was published in 1909, under the title “The Indian War of Independence –1857”. 
The full story of its publication and eventual fate is related, at length, elsewhere in this 
volume. We shall only mention here that its entry into India was banned by the Government 
even before it was published. This ban was finally lifted by the Congress Government of 
Bombay in May 1946, and this is the first authorised edition of the book to be published in 
India. 
As the publishers of this edition we take here the opportunity of recording our 
sense of gratitute to Mr.G.M.Joshi, editor of the Marathi weekly journal Agrani, for making 
this work available to us, and for his continued interest in it while it was going through the 
press. But first of all, we are indebted to Mr. Savarkar himself for letting us publish this book. 
For, ever since the ban on it was lifted the public has been eagerly waiting for it to reappear. 
We consider it a matter of pride that we should be permitted to present it to the public. 
The publication of this edition in the present form would hardly have been 
possible but for the hearty co-operation of many of our friends. First among these is our artist 
friend Mr.M.G.Godse, who not only planned and supervised the entire lay-out and get-up of 
the book, but took more than mere professional interest in the whole work. 
The value of this edition is further enhanced by the many rare photographs and 
pictures kindly lent by Mr.R.M.Athawale from his special “Sattavani Collection” which is 
intended for his forthcoming work, in Marathi, on 1857. He has spent years in studying the 
subject, and has taken a good deal of trouble to collect the material for his work. It is because 
his high respect for Mr. Savarkar and his special regard for Mr. Savarkar’s history of 1857 
that he has lent his material to us. Among the pictures lent by him, the one of Maharaja Jayaji 
Rao Scindia of Gwalior, and those of two of Rani of Jhansi’s cannons were given him by the 
Archaeological Department of Gwalior State for suitable use. We are thankful to Mr. 
Athawale for allowing us to use of these also. 
We are also thankful to Mr. Purav, photographer; Mr. H.S.Dhargalkar, of 
India Block Co.; Mr. D.D.Neroy, Block-maker; Mr.M.V.Kamat, of Bombay Process Studio; 
and to the Industrial Art Studio, Bombay. They all went out of their way to execute our work 
at the shortest notice and without the least hesitation. Last of all, we must thank the printers 
and other workers of the Karnatak Printing Press for the care and despatch with which they 
handled the work. 
THE STORY OF THIS HISTORY 
“ An honest tale speeds best 
By being plainly told.” - Shakespeare 
Apart from the splendid merits of the subject matter dealt with in the warlit 
pages of this history of “The Indian War of Independence of 1857”, the story of the thrilling 
vicissitudes through which this book had to pass does by itself entitle it to be placed on the 
classical shelf in any world library. 
The Object and the Name of the Book 
Veer Savarkarji, the famous author of this book, did himself explain in an 
article in the “Talwar”, an organ of the Abhi Nava Bharat Revolutionary Society, which was 
started by him and published in Paris, that his object in writing this history was, subject to 
historical accuracy, to inspire his people with a burning desire to rise again and wage a 
second and a successful war to liberate their motherland. He also expected that the history 
should serve to place before the revolutionists an outline of a programme of organisation and 
2 
action to enable them to prepare the nation for a future war of liberation. It would never have 
been possible to preach such a revolutionary gospel publicly throughout India or carry 
conviction so effectively as an illuminating illustration of what had actually happened in the 
nearest past would do. So he invoked the warriors of 1857 to deliver his message through 
their own mighty words and mightier deeds. 
The ideal of absolute political Independence, and the conviction that the 
ultimate and inevitable means to realize that ideal could be no other than an armed national 
revolt against the foreign domination.- were concepts which in those days – lay even beyond 
the horizon of the then political thought and action in India. The very mention of them was 
brushed aside as chimerical by the then extremists, was denounced as criminal by the loyal 
moderates and was even anathematised as immoral by the half-witted moralists ! But these 
self-same concepts formed the two fundamental tenets of the A.N.B. (Abhi Nava Bharat) 
Revolutionary organisation. “Reforms and a peaceful solution” formed the alpha and omega 
of the ambition of the then Indian National Congress itself. Independence, Revolution- let 
alone a War for Independence – were as a rule words almost unknown, unheard and 
inconceivably incomprehensible even to the highly patriotic Indian world. It was to familiaze 
this Indian patriotic world with at least these words in daily thought, and by their constant 
repetition, like that of a ‘Mantram’, to hypnotize the youthful political mind into a sub- 
conscious attraction for the noble concepts, which the words connoted – that Savarkar, who 
as a Historian would have called this book a history of the ‘National Rising’ or of the 
‘Revolutionary War of 1857’, did, of a set design, name it the history of “The Indian War of 
Independence of 1857.” 
Veer Savarkar always emphasized the necessity in the Indian condition of 
carrying politics and patriotism to the camp, to the military forces in India, for rendering any 
armed revolt practical. The history of the Revolutionary War of 1857 proved beyond cavil or 
criticism that only some fifty years previously our ancestors had aimed to achieve absolute 
political independence, could bring about the active and armed participation in the National 
struggle of the military forces and could wage an inexorable war for the liberation of our 
motherland. He consequently felt that this history it told viewing it through such a 
revolutionary perspective was most likely to animate the rising generation of India with the 
faith that there was no reason why it should not be practicable and even more faithful to try 
again as, at any rate, there was no other way to salvation. How far this expectation of the 
author was realized will be seen as this story proceeds. 
3 
Originally written in Marathi 
This book was written originally in Marathi, in 1908, when Veer Savarkar was 
about twenty-four years of age. Some select chapters used to be reproduced in English, in 
speeches which Veer Savarkarji usedd to deliver at the open weekly meetings of the Free 
India Society in London. Perhaps through this channel or otherwise the detectives got some 
scent of the subject-matter of this book which their reports dubbed as revolutionary, explsive 
and highly treasonous. Soon a chapter or two of the Marathi manuscript were found missing, 
which, it was disclosed later on, were stolen by the detective agents, and found their way to 
the Scotland Yard, the headquarters of the British Intelligence Department in London. 
Nevertheless, the Marathi manuscript was sent to India by the revolutionists so secretly and 
cleverly that, foiling the strict vigilance of the customs authorities of the Indian Ports, it 
reached safely its destination. But the leading press-concerns in Maharashtra dared not run 
the risk of printing the volume. At last, the owner of a printing firm who was himself a 
member of the Abhi Nava Bharat Secret Society undertook to publish it. In the meanwhile, 
the Indian police too got some vague information that the volume was being published in 
Marathi. They, thereupon, carried a number of simultaneous surprise raids on some 
prominent printing houses in Maharashtra. But fortunately, the owner of the Press, where the 
book was being actually printed got a hint through a sympathetic Police Officer and 
succeeded in smuggling out the Marathi manuscript to a safer place just before the search 
party arrived. The manuscript was later on sent back to Paris, instead of to London, and fell 
into the hands of its author. 
Finding thus that it was impossible to get it printed in India, it was decided to 
get the Marathi book printed in Germany, where some Sanskrit literature used to be published 
in the Nagari script. But after a lot of waste of money and time, the scheme had to be given 
up as hopeless, owing to the uncouth and ugly Nagari type cast in Germany, and to the fact 
that the German compositors were absolutely ignorant of the Marathi language. 
The History translated into English 
4 
The A.N.B. Revolutionary Party resolved thereupon to publish, at least, the 
English Translation of this History of the Indian War of Independence of 1857 with a view to 
enabling the English speaking public, both in India and outside, to know its contents. A few 
highly intellectual Maratha youths in London, members of the A.N.B., distinguished 
graduates of Indian Universities studying Law, and candidates for the I.C.S. Examination, 
volunteered to translate the voluminous work into English. After the translation was complete 
under the supervision of Sriyut V.V.S.Aiyer, efforts were made to get it printed in England. 
But the British detectives, too, were not idle, and made it impossible for any British printer to 
undertake the publication of it for fear of being prosecuted forthwith. The English manuscript 
was then sent to Paris; but the French Government at that time was so thoroughly under the 
thumb of England, with whom France had to ally herself in order to face combinedly the 
impending danger of a German invasion that the French detectives were working hand in 
hand with the British police to suppress the A.N.B. revolutionary activities in France; and 
under their threat, even a French printer could not be found ready to run the risk of printing 
this history. At last by a successful ruse, the revolutionists persuaded a printing firm in 
Holland to print the book. The British Intelligence Department continued to grope in the dark, 
as the revolutionists publicly gave it out that the English translation was being printed in 
France. Before the British detectives could get any inkling, the volume was printed in 
Holland and the whole edition of the English translation was smuggled into France and kept 
secretly ready for distribution. 
In the meanwhile, before the book was sent to Holland for getting it printed, 
the British and the Indian Governments got so nervous, and dreaded so much the effects of 
Savarkar’s writings that they proscribed the book which they admitted was not yet printed ! 
This was so high-handed a step on their part that the English papers themselves resented this 
action of proscribing a book before its publication- a case almost unprecedented in a land 
which boasted of its Freedom of the Press. Veer Savarkar also did not spare the Governments 
and poured vials of ridicule on the proscribing order in a spirited letter which he wrote to 
“The London Times”. He challenged in it, “It is admitted by the authorities that they were not 
sure whether the manuscript had gone to print. If that is so, how does the Government know 
that the book is going to be so dangerously seditious as to get it proscribed before its 
publication, or even before it was printed? The Government either possess a copy of the 
manuscript or do not. If they have a copy, then why did they not prosecute me for sedition as 
that would have been the only course legitimately left to them? On the contrary, if they have 
no copy of the manuscript how could they be so cocksure of the seditious nature of a book of 
5 
which they do not know anything beyond some vague, partial and unauthenticated reports?” 
The “London Times” not only published the letter, but added a note of its own that the very 
fact that the Government should have felt it necessary to have recourse to such presumably 
high-handed and extraordinary executive steps proved that there must be “Something very 
rotten in the State of Denmark.” 
After getting the English translation printed in Holland, the revolutionists 
smuggled into India hudreds of its copies by ingenious devices. Many of them were wrapped 
in artistic covers specially printed with such innocuous and bogus names as “Pickwick 
Papers,” “Scot’s Works,” “Don Quixote” etc. Several copies got smuggled in bozes with false 
bottoms. It will be interesting to note that one such box, containing a number of copies under 
a false bottom, was taken into India by a youthful member of the Abhi Nava Bharat named 
Shikandar Hayat Khan who later on was known to fame as Sir Shikandar Hayat Khan, the 
chief minister of the Punjab. Even vigilance of the Argus-eyed monster of the Bombay 
Customs House failed to spot these dedvices and thousands of copies did thus reach their 
destination in India addressed to many prominent leaders, members of Abhi Nava Bharat, 
leading libraries, colleges and especially to secret sympathisers who had access to several 
military camps throughout India. All these copies of this first edition of this history were sent 
free, even the postal charges being defrayed by the A.N.B.Revolutionary Society. It was then 
openly published in France, was freely circulated and widely read by leading English 
historians, politicians and revolutionary circles especially in Ireland, France, Russia, 
America, Egypt and Germany. 
The “Gadar” in America and the second English Edition. 
In the year 1910, the British and the Indian Governments launched a violent 
campaign of persecutions and prosecutions with a view to crushing the Abhi Nava Bharat 
Secret Society. Several Indian revolutionaries were hanged; several transported for life; 
hundreds sentenced to terms extending from ten to fourteen years of rigorous imprisonment. 
The heroic story of Veer Savarkar’s arrest, escape, re-arrest, persecution, prosecutions and 
consequent trfansportation to the Andamans for two life-sentences amounting to at least fifty 
year’s imprisonment, is well-known to be recited here. 
No sooner did the Abhi Nava Bharat organisation recover from this stunning 
blow than Madam Cama, the well-knopwn brave Parsi lady, Lala Hardayal, Chattopadhyaya 
6 
and other leaders of the A.N.B.Revolutionary Party decided to bring out the second English 
edition of this book. Lala Hardayalji organised the American branch of the A.N.B. and started 
his well-known newspaper “The Gadar”-(Rebellion) in America. Not only was the second 
English edition of this Indian War of Independence of 1857 published this time for regular 
sale to replenish the party funds; but translations of this history were published the party 
funds; but translations of this History were published regularly in Urdu, Hindi and Punjabi 
languages secretly through the “Gadar”. It aroused the Sepoys in the Army, as the “Gadar” 
reached several camps in India and especially the large number of the Sikh agriculturists 
settled in America. Soon after that, the First World War broke out. How the Indian 
revolutionists in India and outside joined hands with the Germans against England, how large 
amounts of arms and ammunitions were smuggled into India, how the ‘Komagatamaru’ 
succeeded in landing revolutionary forces in India, how the Emden bombarded Indian ports,. 
How mutinies broke out in Indian regiments stationed at Hong Kond, Singapore, and Burma 
under the leadership of Gadar party and how this attempt by the Indian revolutionaries to 
invade India to liberate her was at last frustrated owing to the defeat of the Germans, is now a 
matter of history. Nevertheless, this revolutionary campaign proved to be a veritable rehearsal 
of the recent Military Invasion attempted on a mightier scale by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose 
with the I.N.A. Throughout this later revolutionary movement, it became evident from the 
trials of hundreds of leaders and followers that this history of the first Indian War of 
Independence of 1857 proved to be a perennial source of inspiration, and even provided a 
detailed sketch of the programme of action. The demand for its copies was so great that they 
used to be sold and resold, in cases, for such fabulolus prices as 300 Rupees each. Thousands 
of the arrested revolutionaries were found in possession of them, and possession of a copy of 
this book was taken to be a proof by itself of the complicity of the possessor in the 
revolutionary activities. 
“The Original Marathi Book is Dead!- Long live the book!!” 
After the arrest of Veer Savarkar the manuscript of the original Marathi book 
was handed over to Madam Cama in Paris. She kept it in her safe in the Bank of France with 
a view to placing it beyond the reach of the Agents of the British Intelligence Department. 
But the invasion of France by the Germans threw the Government of France itself into a 
hopeless disorder. Madam Cama too, passed away. Consequently, when a searching enquiry 
was made regarding the whereabouts of the book no trace of the manuscript could be found. 
7 
The great Marathi tome was lost- no hope of its recovery was left. Marathi literature had thus 
suffered an irreparable loss. 
The Third Known English Edition of the History 
As we are noting down only those editions of which we have definite 
knowledge, leaving out of count those of which rumour alone informs us, the next English 
edition we must take cognizance of, is that which, after the re-emergence of the revolutionary 
party on an all India basis, was printed and published in two parts, of course secretly, under 
Veer Bhagatsing’s lead. It was sold widely at high prices and the proceeds went to swell the 
party funds. The few copies, almost religiously preserved even at the risk of prosecution and 
persecution, which can be rarely found even to-day, belong, in the main, to this edition. The 
conspiracy cases which followed the arrest of Veer Bhagatsing and his leading comrades 
revealed the fact that copies of this book were found in searches in the possession of almost 
all the accused and that this History animated them to face martyrdom and guided them to 
chalk out the revolutionary programme- to organise an armed revolt to liberate our 
motherland ! The Indian National Army organised by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose 
and the Fifty English Edition. 
The well-ascertained fifth edition came to light in the days when the last and 
the most determined efforts was made to organize an army on the large scale, yet recorded, to 
invade India to free her from the British bondage, by Rash Bihari Bose, the President of the 
Hindu Maha Sabha branch in Japan, and which army was later on commanded by Netaji 
Subhas Chandra Bose. Unimpeachable evidence recorded by patriots and warriors who took 
an actual part in the invasion shows that this ‘History’ was read and re-read in their camps 
and was looked upon as a veritable text-book for the soldiers and officers in the army. A stray 
copy of a Tamil edition was also ransacked. Its tattered pages were glued and the volume was 
rebound and circulated in the army. But it is not known when or by whom the Tamil 
translation was made and published. 
The Sixth English Edition to Challenge the Ban on the Book 
8 
While throughout the last thirty or forty years the revolutionists were thus 
bringing out secretly, edition after edition of this history, an open public agitation was also 
ging on in India demanding the raising of the Governmental ban not only on this history but 
on several other books written by Veer Savarkar. Public meetings and protests made by 
literary societies went unheeded by the British Government in England as well as in India. 
Even when the so called National ministries formed by the Congressites came to power some 
ten years ago, they too did not raise the ban on Savarkarite literature as perhaps, it not only 
did not countenance but positively denounced the vagaries of the half-witted and even 
immoral doctrine of absolute non-violence to which the Congressites swore only verbal 
allegiance. But when the recent World War II was over and the present Congressite ministries 
came into power, the public demand for the raising of this ban grew so unruly that some 
enthusiastic patriots threatened to challenge and break the ban. They raised funds and secretly 
printed a new English edition in Bombay with a view to selling it openly and publicly 
courting arrests. They even informed the Congressite ministers of their intention. 
The Ban Raised at Last after some Forty Years of Proscription. 
When matters came to this pass and as the Government too was inclined to 
reconsider the question, the ban on Savarkarite literature as a whole, which continued to be 
proscribed for some forty years in the past, was raised by the Congressite ministry at long 
last, upon which sane act they deserve to be congratulated. 
“The Book became the Bible of the Indian Revolutionists” 
It will be evident from the story as recited above that the book continued to be 
regarded as a veritable Bible by the Indian Revolutionists ever since the armed struggle for 
Indian Independence initiated by the Abhi Nava Bharat bands down to recent times when 
full-fledged armies marched to the battle-fields under Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. Directly 
and indirectly the book has influenced, animated and guided at least two generations in India 
in their struggles to free the Motherland. That is why the Nation itself made it a point of 
honour to keep the book alive as a national asset in defiance of the violent efforts of the 
foreign government to suppress and kill it. Its survival despite of it all is almost miraculous. 
Miraculous too is the survival of its illustrious author who, in spite of untold 
sufferings and sacrifices, trials, tribulations and transportations, has been spared by 
9 
Providence to witness the triumphant march of the Revolutionary principles and programmes 
which he as a SEER preached and as a WARRIOR fought to carry out. 
The Book Pays out National Debt to the Memory of the Warriors of 1857 
We cannot do better than to quote Shrijut Subbarao, the gifted editor of the 
‘Gosthi’ to illustrate the above truth : 
“ The British Raj in India has treated Savarkar’s book as most dangerous for 
their existence here. So it has been banned. But it has been read by millions of our 
countrymen including my humble self. In trying to elevate the events of 1857, which 
interested Historians and Administrators had not hesitated to call for decades as an ‘Indian 
Mutiny’, to its right pose of ‘Indian War of Independence’. All be it a foiled attempt at that ! 
It is not a work of a Patriotic Alchemist turning base mutineering into noble revolutionary 
action. Even in these days what would the Mahatmic school have called the efforts of Subhas 
Bose’s Azad-Hind-Fouj if Savarkar’s alchemy had not intervened ? True. Both the 1857 and 
1943 ‘Wars’ have ended in failure for our country. But the motive behind- was it mere 
Mutineering or War for Independence ? If Savarkar had not intervened between 1857 and 
1943, I am sure that the recent efforts of the Indian National Army would have been again 
dubbed as an Ignoble Mutiny effectively crushed by the valiant British-cum-Congress arms 
and armlessness. But thanks to Savarkar’s book Indian sense of a “Mutiny” has been itself 
revolutionised. Not even Lord Wavell, I suppose, can now call Bose’s efforts as a Mutiny. 
The chief credit for the change of values must go to Savarkar- and to him alone. But the 
greatest value of Savarkar’s Book lies in its gift to the Nation of that Torch of Freedom in 
whose light an humble I and a thousand other Indians have our dear daughters named after 
Laxmibai, the Rani of Jhansi. Even Netaji Bose in a fateful hour had to form an army corps 
named after Rani of Jhansi. But for Savarkar’s discovery of that valiant heroine, Rani of 
Jhansi should have been a long-for-gotten ‘Mutineer’ of the nineteenth century.” 
- Free Hindusthan, Sopecial, 28th May, 1946 
This history has literally resurrected from continuing to be entombed in 
oblivion the spirits of the bravest of the leaders, warriors and martyrs who fell fighting in 
1857, and taught us to pay our admiring and loyal tribute to Nana Sahib, Bala Rao, Kumar 
Singh, Mangal Pande, Ahmad Shah, the Queen of Jhansi, Senapati Tatia Tope and hosts of 
10 our warriors. The names could never have been on the lips of millions today but for the 
researches of Veer Savarkar guided by a gifted intuition and on a par with such excavationas 
at Mohenjodaro. It cannot but be a source of satisfaction to Veer Savarkarji that the 
expectations he cherished about this History, when he wrote it in his youth, should have been 
realised before his eyes. But we are afraid that his satisfaction in this case must be only 
partial. For he never could conceive that the ‘Rising of 1857’ was an event complete by itself. 
He looked upon the war of 1857 as but a campaign in the war of Independence in its entirety. 
He did not, therefore, mean the book to serve as merely the annals of the past but also as a 
source of inspiration and guidance to the Future. Consequently he must be expecting this 
History to continue to discharge its mission yet further till the end in view is accomplished. 
This end is clearly marked out by Veer Savarkar himself as the following page will show. 
The special tribunal, which tried him in 1910 for waging war against the Kind 
(of course of England !) and sentenced him to transportation for life and forfeiture of his 
property, quotes in its judgment as an overwhelming proof of his ‘guilt’ the following 
statement issued by Savarkar in 1908 from London : 
“The war begun on the 10th of May 1857 is not over on the 10th of May 1908, nor can it ever cease till a 10th of May to come sees the destiny accomplished and out 
Motherland stands free !” 
G.M.JOSHI 
Bombay: 10th January,1947 
THE ORIGINAL PUBLISHER’S PREFACE 
This book on the history of 1857 was originally written in an Indian 
vernacular. But owing to the unique nature of the book which for the first time ever since the 
great War was fought, proves from the English writers themselves that the rising of the Indian 
people in 1857 was in no way an insignificant chapter in, or a tale unworthy of, a great 
people’s history, pressing requests were made from many quarters to translate the work into 
the English language, so that, by translations into the other vernaculars, the whole of the 
Indian nation might be enabled to read the history of the ever memorable War of 1857. 
Realising the reasonableness and importance of these requests and with the kind permission 
11 
of the author the publishers undertook the translation of the original into the English 
language. With the patriotic co-operation of many of their countrymen, they are able to-day 
to place this work in the hands of Indian readers. 
The work of translating an Oriental work into a western tongue has ever been 
a task of immense difficulty, even when the translator has all the facilities which leisure and 
training could afford. But when the translation had to be done by divers hands and within a 
very short time, it was clearly foreseen by the publishers that the translation would be 
defective and unidiomatic. But the main point before the publishers was not to teach the 
Indian people how to make an elegant translation nor to show them how to write correct 
English – points to which they were supremely indifferent- but to let them show how their 
nation fought for its Independence and how their ancestors died “for the ashes of their fathers 
and the temples of their Gods.” So, the publishers decided to run the risk of publishing the 
book as soon as it could explain the facts it had to tell, though none could be more conscious 
of the faults of the language than they themselves. Fifty years have passed and yet those who 
died for the honour of their soil and race are looked upon as madmen and villains by the 
world abroad ; while their own kith and kin for whom they shed their blood, are ashamed 
even to own them ! To allow this state of public opinion, born of stupid ignorance, and 
purposely and systematically kept up by a band of interested hirelings, to continue any 
longer, would have been a national sin. So, the publishers have not waited till the language of 
this translation could be rendered elegant. Which would be more shameful- to let hideous 
calumny hover over and smother down the spirit of martyrdom, or to let some mistake creep 
into a book admittedly translated into a foreign tongue? The first, at the best, was a crime, 
and the second at the worst a venial literary offence. Therefore, the publishers owe no 
apology to, nor would one be asked for by, the Indian readers for whose special benefit, the 
work is published. 
But, to those sympathetic foreign readers who might be inclined to read this 
book, we owe an apology for the faults of the language and crave their indulgence for the 
same. 
THE PUBLISHERS 
LONDON, MAY 10, 1909 
12 
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 
Firty years having passed by, the circumstances having changed, and the 
prominent actors on both sides being no more, the account of the War of 1857 has crossed the 
limits of current politics and can be relegated to the realms of history. 
When, therefore, taking the searching attitude of an historian, I began to scan 
that instructive and magnificent spectacle, I found to my great surprise the brilliance of a War 
of Independence shining in “the mutiny of 1857”. The spirits of the dead seemed hallowed by 
martyrdom,. And out of the heap of ashes appeared forth sparks of a fiery inspiration. I 
thought that my countrymen will be most agreeably disappointed, even as I was, at this deep- 
buried spectacle in one of the most neglected corners of our history, if I could but show this 
13 
to them by the light of research. So, I tried to do the same and am able to-day to present to 
my Indian readers this startling but faithful picture of the great events of 1857. 
The nation that has no consciousness of its part has no future. Equally true it is 
that a nation must develop its capacity not only of claiming a past but also of knowing how to 
use it for the furtherance of its future. The nation ought to be the master and not the slave of 
its own history. For, it is absolutely unwise to try to do certain things now irrespective of 
special considerations, simply because they had been once acted in the past. The feeling of 
hatred against the Mahomedans was just and necessary in the times of Shivaji- but, such a 
feeling would be unjust and foolish if nursed now, simply because it was the dominant 
feeling of the Hindus then. 
As almost all the authorities on which this work is based are English authors, 
for whom it must have been impossible to paint the account of the other side as elaborately 
and as faithfully as they have done their own, it is perfectly possible that many a scene, other 
than what this book contains, might have been left unstated, and many a scene described in 
this book might be found to have been wrongly described. But if some patriotic historian 
would go to northern India and try to collect the traditions from the very mouths of those who 
witnessed and perhaps took a leading part in the War, the opportunity of knowing the exact 
account of this can still be caught, though unfortrunately it will be impossible to do so before 
very long. When, within a decade or two, the whole generation of those who took part in that 
war shall have passed away never to return, not only would it be impossible to have the 
pleasure of seeing the actors themselves, but the history of their actions will have to be left 
permanently incomplete. Will any patriotic historian undertake to prevent this while it is not 
yet too late ? 
Even the slightest reference and the most minute details in this book can be as 
much substantiated by authoritative works as the important events and the main currents of 
the history. 
Before laying down this pen, the only desire I want to express is that such a 
patriotic and yet faithful, a more detailed and yet coherent, history of 1857 may come 
forward in the nearest future from an Indian pen, so that this my humble writing may soon be 
forgotten ! 
14 
THE AUTHOR 
LIST OF IMPORTANT BOOKS CONSULTED 
ARNOLD,SIR EDWIN, K.C.I.E.- The Marquis of Dalhousie’s Administration of British 
India. 
BALL, CHARLES- The History of the Indian Mutiny. 
COOPLAND, MRS.- A lady’s Excape from Gwalior. 
DUFF, DR.ALEXANDER- The Indian Rebellion: Its Causes and Results in a series of 
Letters. 
EYRE, SIR VINCENT- Letters and Despatches. 
FORBES-MITCHELL, WILLIAM- Reminiscences of the Great Mutiny, 1857-59. 
FORGETT- Real Danger in India. 
FORREST,GEORGE WILLIAM- State Papers (Several Series). 
15 
GRANT,SIR JAMES HOPE- Incidents in the Sepoy War,1857-58. (Compiled from the 
privvate journals of Sir Hope Grant..... together with explanatory chapters by 
H.Knollys). 
GUBBINS,MARTIN RICHARD- An Account of the Mutinies in Oudh and the Siege of the 
Lucknow Residency. 
HOLLOWAY- Essays on the Indian Mutiny. 
HOLMES- History of the Indian Mutiny. 
JACOB,SIR GEORGE LE GRANT- Western India before and during the Mutinies: pictures 
drawn from life. 
KAYE, SIR JOHN WILLIAM- A History of the Sepoy War in India, 3 vols. 
KAYE AND MALLESON- History of the Indian Mutiny, 6 vols. 
KHAN, MU’IN AL-DIN HASAN- Two Native Narratives. 
LECKEY, EDWARD- Fictions Connected with the Indian Outbreak of 1857 Exposed. 
LOWE, THOMAS, M.R.C.S.- Central India during the Rebellion of 1857. 
MALLESON, G.B.-Red Pamphlet. 
MARTIN,WILLIAM- Why is the English Rule Odious to the Natives of India? 
MEAD,HENRY- The Sepoy Revolt: Its Causes and Consequences. 
MEDLEY, JULIUS GEORGE- A Year’s Campaigning in India from Marcfh 1857 to March 
1858. 
METCALFE- Native Narratives. 
ROBERTS,LORD- Forty-one Years in India. 
RUSSEL, SIR WM.HOWARD- My Diary in India in the year 1958-59, 2 vols. 
SHEPHERD- Personal Narrative of Cawnpore. 
SYLVESTER- Recollections. 
TAYLER,WILLIAM- The Patna Crisis. 
TAYLOR,MEADOWS- The Story of My Life. 
THOMSON, MOWBRAY- The Story of Cawnpore. 
TRAVELYAN, SIR GEORGE OTTO- Cawnpore. 
WHITE- Complete History of the Great Sepoy War. 
WILSON- The Defence of Lucknow. State Papers and several other books. 
ANON- History of the Siege of Delhi, by an Officer who served there. 
ANON- Military Narrative. 
16 
ANON- Narrative of the Indian Revolt,etc. Reprinted from the “Illustrated Times.” 
िशपायाच बड – वनायक क डदव ओक (मराठ ) 
िशपाई य दर इितहास – (बगाली) 
झाशी या राणीच च रऽ – पारसनीस 
गोडस याचा ‘माझा ूवास’ – व ानी ूकािशलल 
17 
INDIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE 1857 
PART-I The Volcano 
CHAPTER-I SWADHARMA & SWARAJ 
It is a simple truism patent even to the uneducated that the most tiny house cannot be built 
without a foundation strong enough to support its weight. When writers who profess to write 
the history of the Revolution that was enacted in India in 1857 ignore this common sense 
principle and do not try to discuss the real causes that led to it and impudently maintain that 
the vast edifice of the Revolution was built on a blade of straw, they must either be fools or, 
what is more probable, knaves. Anyway, it is certain that they are unfit for the holy work of 
the historian. 
In all great religious and political revolutions, it is almost impossible to connect together 
links apparently inconsistent, without thoroughly understanding the principles which are at 
their root. On seeing a great work of machinery composed of innumerable screws and wheels 
doing work of tremendous magnitude if we do not understand how the power is produced, we 
may feel bewildering astonishment, but never the inner pleasure due to knowledge. When 
writers describe such stirring events as the French Revolution or the religious revolution of 
Holland, the very splendour and magnitude of the crises they paint, often, dazzle and confuse 
their mind’s eye and they rarely gather sufficient coolness and courage to go deep into the 
underlying principles. But without an exposition of the hidden causes and the mysterious 
forces that worked beneath, the essence of a revolution can never be made plain. And 
therefore it is that history attaches more importance to the exposition of principles than to 
mere narrative. 
While searching after principles, historians often commit another mistake. For every act, 
there are various causes, direct and indirect, general and particular, accidental and necessary. 
In their proper classification lies the true skill of the historian. In this process of classification 
many historians get mixed up and make the accidental into a necessary cause. These make 
themselves as ridiculous as the judge in the story who, in a case of arson, put all the 
responsibility on the match instead of the man who struck it. The real importance of any 
18 
event can never be understood by this confusion of causes. Not merely that, but mankind 
begins positively to curse the memory of men who are represented as having started, with a 
light heart and private selfish motives, a Revolution in the course of which countless lives are 
lost and immense expanses of country devastated. And therefore, in writing the history of any 
event in general, and of revolutionary movements in particular, a writer cannot give a true 
idea of them by means of simple description, or even by tracing them backwards to accidental 
causes. An upright and impartial historian must try to discover the foundations on which the 
revolutionary structure was erected. He must try to discover and discuss fundamental causes. 
Mazzini, in a critical article on Carlyle’s French Revolution, has said that every revolution 
must have had a fundamental principle. Revolution is a complete rearrangement in the life of 
historic man. A revolutionary movement cannot be based on a flimsy and momentary 
grievance. It is always due to some all-moving principle for which hundreds and thousands of 
men fight, before which thrones totter, crowns are destroyed and created, existing ideals are 
shattered and new ideals break forth, and for the sake of which vast masses of people think 
lightly of shedding sacred human blood. The moving spirits of revolutions are deemed holy 
or unholy in proportion as the principle underlying them is beneficial or wicked. As in private 
life, so also in history, the deeds of an individual or a nation are judged by the character of 
the motive. If we forget this test, we cannot appreciate the vast difference between the 
empire-building wars of Alexander the Great and Italy’s fight for liberty under Garibaldi. Just 
as to decide about the merits of these two different events one has to consider the prime 
motive of the chief actors in those wars, so also to write a full history of a revolution means 
necessarily the tracing of all the events of that revolution back to their source, - the motive, 
the innermost desire to those who brought it about. This is the telescope which will show 
clearly the lights and shadows obscured by the blurred presentation of partial and prejudiced 
historians. When a beginning is made in this manner, order appears in the apprent chaos of 
inconsistent facts, crooked lines become straight, and straight lines appear crooked, light 
appears where darkness is, and darkness spreads over light, what appeared ugly becomes fair 
and what looked beautiful is seen to be deformed. And expectedly, or unexpectedly, but in a 
clear form, the Revolution comes into the light of real history. 
The history of the tremendous Revolution that was enacted in India in the year 1857 has 
never been written in this scientific spirit by any author, Indian or foreign. And hence there 
are current throughout the world most extraordinary, misleading, and unjust ideas about that 
Revolutionary War. English authors have committed, in this respect, all the faults noted 
19 
above. Some of them have not made any attempt beyond merely describing the events, but 
most of them have written the history in a wicked and partial spirit. Their prejudiced eye 
could not or would not see the root principle of that Revolution. Is it possible, can any sane 
man maintain, that that all-embracing Revolution could have taken place without a principle 
to move it ? Could that vast tidal wave from Peshawar to Calcutta have risen in flood without 
a fixed intention of drowning something by means of its force ? Could it be possible that the 
sieges of Delhi, the massacres of Cawnpore, the banner of the Empire, heroes dying for it, 
could it ever be possible that such noble and inspiring deeds have happened without a noble 
and inspiring end ? Even a small village market does not take place without an end, a motive; 
how, then, can we believe that that great market opened and closed without any purpose- the 
great market whose shops were on every battle field from Peshawar to Calcutta, where 
kingdoms and empires were being exchanged, and where the only current coin was blood ? 
No, no. The market was neither opened nor closed without a purpose. English historians have 
always ignored this point, not because it is difficult to ascertain it, but because it is against 
their interests to admit the truth. 
Even more deceptive than this indifference, and one which changes or distorts the whole 
spirit of the Revolution of 1857 is the other device of English historians copied by their 
Indian sycophants,- the device, namely, of describing the rumour as to the greased cartridges as the moving cause of the Revolution. An Indian writer1 drawing inspiration from English 
history and English money says, “Foolish people went mad simply at the rumour that 
cartridges were greased with cows’ and pigs’ fat. Did anyone inquire as to whether the report 
was true? One man said and another believed; because the second became disaffected, a third 
joined him, and so like a procession of blind men, a company of inconsiderate fools arose, 
and rebellion broke out.” We propose to discuss later on whether people blindly believed the 
rumour about cartridges. But it will be plain to anyone who has read even the English 
historians closely and thought about the matter, that a great attempt has been made to father 
all the responsibility of the Revolution on this rumour. It isnot surprising that to one, who 
thinks that a mighty rising like that of ’57 can be produced by such trifles, it was only ‘ a 
company of inconsiderate fools.’ If the Revolution had been due only to the cartridges, why 
did Nana Sahib, the Emperor of Delhi, the Queen of Jhansi, and Khan Bahadur Khan of 
20 1. िशपायाच बड – वनायक क डदव ओक 
Rohilkhand join it ? These were not surely going to serve in the English army, nor were they 
compelled to break the cartridges with their teeth ! If the rising were due wholly or chiefly to 
the cartridges, it would have stopped suddenly as soon as the English Governor-General 
issued a proclamation that they should not be used any more ! He gave them permission to 
make cartridges with their own hand, But instead of doing so, or ending the whole by leaving 
the Company’s service altogether, the sepoys rose to fight in battle. Not only the sepoys but 
thousands of peaceful citizens and Rajas and Maharajas also rose, who had no direct or 
indirect connection with the army. It is therefore clear that if was not these accidental things 
that roused the spirit of the sepoy and the civilian, kind and pauper, Hindu and 
Mahommedan. 
Equally misleading is the theory that the rising was due to the annexation of Oudh. How 
many were fighting, taking their lives in their hands, that had no interest whatsoever in the 
fortunes of the Oudh dynasty? Then, what was their motive in fighting? The Nabob of Oudh 
himself was imprisoned in the fort of Calcutta; and according to the English historians, his 
subjects were very much disaffected under his regime. Then, why did Talukdars, soldiers, 
and almost every one of his subjects unsheath their swords for him ? A ‘Hindu’ of Bengal 
wrote an essay in England at that time about the Revolution. In it the ‘Hindu’ says, ‘You have 
no idea how many simple and kind-hearted people who had never seen the Nabob, nor were 
ever again likely to see, wept in their huts when the sorrows of the Nabob were being related 
before them. And you do not also know how many soldiers were daily taking an oath, after 
the tears had flown, to avenge this insult on Wajid Ali Shah, as if a calamity had falle on 
themselves in person.’ Why did the Sepoy feel this sympathy with the Nabob and why did 
eyes which had never seen the Nabob glisten with tears? It is plain, therefore, that the 
Revolution did not break out simply on account of the annexation of Oudh. 
The fear of greased cartridges and the annexation of Oudh were only temporary and 
accidental causes. To turn these into real causes would never help us in understanding the real 
spirit of the Revolution. If we were to take them as the real moving causes, it would mean 
that, without these, the Revolution would not have taken placed- that without the rumour of 
greased cartridges and without the annexation of Outh, the Revolution would not have been 
there. It would be impossible to find a theory more foolish and more deceptive. If there had 
been no fear of the cartridges, the principle underlying that fear would have cropped up in 
21 
some other form and produced a Revolution just the same. Even if Oudh had not been 
annexed, the principle of annexation would have manifested itself in the destruction of some 
other kingdom. The real causes of the French Revolution were not simply the high prices of 
grain, the Bastille, the King’s leaving Paris, or the feasts. These might explain some incidents 
of the Revolution but not the Revolution as a whole. The kidnapping of Sita was only the 
incidental cause of the fight between Rama and Ravana. The real causes were deeper and 
more inward. 
What, then, were the real causes and motives of this Revolution ? What were they that they 
could make thousands of heroes unsheath their swords and flash them on the battlefield? 
What were they that they had the power to brighten up pale and rusty crowns and raise from 
the dust abased flags ? What were they that for them men by the thousand willingly poured 
their blood year after year ? What were they that Moulvies preached them, learned Brahmins 
blessed them, that for their success prayers went up to Heaven from the mosques of Delhi and 
the temples of Benares ? 
These great principles were Swadharma and Swaraj. In the thundering roar of ‘Din, Din,’ 
which rose to protect religion, when there were evident signs of a cunning, dangerous, and 
destructive attack on religion dearer than life, and in the terrific blows dealt at the chain of 
slavery with the holy desire of acquiring Swaraj, when it was evident that chains of political 
slavery had been put round them and their God-given liberty wrested away by subtle tricks- 
in these two, lies the root-principle of the Revolutionary War. In what other history is the 
principle of love of one’s religion and love of one’s country manifested more nobly than in 
ours? However much foreign and partial historians might have tried to paint our glorious land 
in dark colours, so long as the name of Chitore has not been erased from the pages of our 
history, so long as the names of Pratapaditya and Guru Govind Singh are there, so long the 
principles of Swadharma and Swaraj will be embedded in the bone and marrow of all the 
sons of Hindusthan ! They might be darkened for a time by the mist of slavery - even the sun 
has its clouds – but very soon the strong light of these self-same principles pierces through 
the mist and chases it away. Never before were there such a number of causes for the 
universal spreading of these traditional and noble principles as there were in 1857. These 
particular reasons revived most wonderfully the slightly unconscious feelings of Hindusthan, 
and the people began to prepare for the right for Swadharma and Swaraj. In his Proclamation 
of the establishment of Swaraj, the Emperor of Delhi says, ‘Oh, you sons of Hindusthan, if 
we make up our mind we can destroy the enemy in no time ! We will destroy the enemy and 
22 
will release from dread our religion and our country, dearer to us than life itself’2. What is 
holier in this world than such a Revolutionary War, a war for the noble principles 
propounded in this sentence, ‘release from dead our religion and our country, dearer to us 
than life itself’? The seed of the Revolution of 1857 is in this holy and inspiring idea, clear 
and explicit, propounded from the throne of Delhi, THE PROTECTION OF RELIGION 
AND COUNTRY. In the Proclamation issued at Bareilly, he says “Hindus and Mahomedans 
of India! Arise ! Brethren, arise ! Of all the gifts of God, the most gracious is that of Swaraj. 
Will the oppressive Demon who has robbed us of it b y deceit be able to keep it away from us 
for ever? Can such an act against the will of God stand for ever? No, no. The English have 
committed so many atrocities that the cup of their sins is already full. To add to it they have 
got now the wicked desire to destroy our holy religion ! Are you going to remain idle even 
now? God does not wish that you should remain so; for he has inspired in the hearts of 
Hindus and Mahomedans the desire to turn the English out of our country. And by the grace 
of God, and your valour, they will soon be so completely defeated that in this our Hindusthan 
there will not remain even the least trace of them ! In this our army, the differences of smal 
and great shall be forgotten, and equality shall be the rule; for, all who draw the sword in this 
holy war for the defence of religion are equally glorious. They are brethren, there is no rank 
among them. Therefore, I again say to all my Hindi brethren, ‘Arise and jump into battlefield 
for this divinely ordained and supreme duty! ” The man who, after seeing such magnificent 
utterances by the Revolutionary leaders, does not understand its principles is, as we said, 
either a fool or a knave. What stronger evidence is needed to prove that Indian warriors drew 
their swords at the time for Swardharma and Swaraj, feeling it the duty of every man to fight 
for the rights given to man by God ? These Proclamations issued at different times and placed 
during the war make it unnecessary to dilate more on its principles. These Proclamations 
were not issued by nonentities; but they were orders issued from adorable and powerful 
thrones. They were burning expressions of the agitated feelings of the time. In these the real 
heart of the Nation had spoken out, when at the time of war, there was no occasion to conceal 
real sentiments through pressure or fear. This trmendous, heroic shout, ‘Swadharma and 
Swaraj,’ proclaims to the world the character of the Revolution in which ‘all who draw the 
sword are equally glorious.’ 
But were these two principles understood as different and exclusive of each other ? At least, 
orientals have never had the idea that Swadharma and Swaraj have no connection with each 
23 
2. Leckey’s Fictitious Exposed and Urdu works. 
other. The Eastern mind has maintained a full and traditional belief, as is also said by 
Mazzini, that there is no vast barrier between Heaven and earth but that the two are ends of 
one and the same thing. Our idea of Swadharma, too, is not contradictory to that of Swaraj. 
The two are connected as means and end. Swaraj without Swadharma is despicable and 
Swadharma without Swaraj is powerless. The sword of material power, Swaraj, should 
always be ready drawn for our object, our safety is the other world, Swadharma. This trend of 
the Eastern mind will be often found in its history. The reason why, in the East all revolutions 
take a religious form, nay more, the reason why Eastern history knows of no revolutions 
unconnected with religion, lies in the all-embracing meaning that the word ‘Dharma’ has. 
That this dual principle of Swadharma and Swaraj, always seen in the history of India, 
appeared also in the Revolution of 1857, should be a matter of no surprise. We have already 
referred to the first Proclamation of the Emperor of Delhi. Afterwards when Delhi was 
beseiged by the English and the war was at its height, the Emperor issued another 
Proclamation addressing all Indians thus : ‘Why has God given us wealth, land, power? They 
are not for individual pleasure, but they are give for the holy object of defence of our 
religion’. But where are now the means to attain this holy end ? As said in the Proclamation 
given above, where is the gift of Swaraj, the greatest of all the gifts of God ? 
Where is wealth ? Where is land? Where is power? In the plague of slavery, all this divine 
independence is all but dead. In the above Proclamation, in order to show how the plague of 
slavery was destroying India, full descriptions are given as to how the Kingdoms of Nagpur, 
Ayodhya, and Jhansi were tramples down into dust. And it awakens the people to the fact that 
they are guilty of the sin of destroying religion in the house of God, having lost these means 
of defending religion. The command of God is, Obtain Swaraj, for that is the chief key to the 
protection of Dharma. He who does not attempt to acquire Swaraj, he who sits silent in 
slavery, he is an atheist and hater of Religion. Therefore, rise for Swadharma and acquire 
Swaraj ! 
Rise for Swadharma and acquire Swaraj !” What divine events in the history of India are due 
to the realisation of this prionciple ! The poet-saint Ramdas gave the same dictum to the 
Mahrattas 250 years ago. “Die for your Dharma, kill the enemies of your Dharma while you are dying; in this way fight and kill, and take back your kingdom !”3 
24 
3. धमा साठ मराव । मरोिन अव यास माराव । 
मा रता मा रता याव । रा य आपल 
This alone is the principle in the Revolutionary War of 1857. This is its mental science. The 
true and clear form, is the above verse of Ramdas. 
Seeing at it through this telescope, what a spectacle comes into view ! The war fought for 
Swadharma does not lose its lustre by defeat. The splendour of Guru Govind Singh’s life is 
none the less, because his efforts did not immediately succeed at the time. Nor do we think 
the less of the rising of 1848 in Italy, because the Revolution failed completely at that time. 
Justin McCarthy says : “The fact was that throughout the greater part of the northern and 
north-western provinces of the Indian peninsula, there was a rebellion of the native races 
against the English power. It was not alone the Sepoy who rose in revolt – it was not by any 
means a merely military mutiny. It was a combination of military grievance, national hatred, 
and religious fanaticism against the English occupation of India. The native princes and the 
native soldiers were in it. The Mahomedan and the Hindu forgot their old religious 
antipathies to join against the Christian. Hatred and panic were the stimulants of that great 
rebellious movement. The quarrel about the greased cartridges was but the chance spark flung 
in among all the combustible material. If that spark had not lighted it, some other would have 
done the work ...... The Meerut Sepoys found, in a moment, a leader, a flag, and a cause, and 
the mutiny was transformed into a revolutionary war. When they reached the Jumna, 
glittering in the morning light, they had all unconsciously seized one of the great critical moments of history and converted a military mutiny into a national and religious war ! ”4 
Charles Ball writes : “At length, the torrent overflowed the banks, and saturated the moral 
soil of India. It was then expected that those waves would overwhelm and destroy the entire 
European element and that, when the torrent of rebellion should again confine itself within 
bounds, patriotic India, freed from its alien rulers, would bow only to the independent sceptre 
of a native price. The movement, now, assumed a more important aspect. It became the 
rebellion of a whole people incited to outrage by resentment for imaginary wrongs and sustained in their delusions by hatred and fanaticism.”5 
White writes in his Complete History of the Great Sepoy War :- “I should be wanting in 
faithfulness as an historian if I failed to record with admiration the courage displayed by the 
25 
4.History of Our Own Times, Vol.III. 
5. Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, page 644. 
Oudhians. The great fault of the Oudh Talukdars from a moral point of view was their having 
made a common cause with the murderous mutineers. But for this, they might have been 
regarded as noble patriots, fighting in a good cause, pro rege et pro patria, for the King and 
the Motherland” – for Swaraj and Swadesh ! 
26 
CHAPTER II THE CHAIN OF CAUSES 
If it is true that the question whether India, bounded by the Himalayas on the north and the 
Ocean on tne south, should be completely independent or not, was being solved on the 
battlefields of the war of 1857, then the chain of causes begins from that day in 1757 when the question was first raised. On the 23rd of June in 1757, the question whether India should 
belong to the Indians or to the English was openly discussed, for the first time, on the field of 
Plassey. On that very day and on that very field, where it was first discussed, were sown the 
seeds of the Revolution. If Plassey had not been there, the War of 1857 also would not have 
taken place. Though a century had rolled by, the memory of that day was fresh in the heart of Hindusthan. In proof of this, witness the terrible scene on the 23rd day of June 1857, in 
Northern India. In the vast country from the Punjab up to Calcutta, wherever there was an 
open field, thousands of Revolutionaries were fighting the English simultaneously in different 
places, from morning till evening, after openly challenging them saying : “To-day we are 
going to avenge Plassey !” 
When, on the battlefield of Plassey, India had sworn to fight a war of freedom, England was, 
as it were, anxious to hasten the day of its fulfilment as much as possible. For, Englishmen 
did not rest with sowing the seeds of the Revolutionary War at Plassey, but they made 
enormous efforts to encourage the growth of the plant all over India. Warren Hastings tended 
the plant in Benares, Rohilkhand, and Bengal. Wellesley did the same in the fertile fields of 
Mysore, Assai, Poona, Satara, and Northern India. This was not done without strong efforts, 
for the ground had to be ploughed not with ordinary ploughs but with swords and guns! What 
would ordinary ploughs avail against Shanwar Palace, the heights of Sahyadri, the forts of 
Agra, and the throne of Delhi ? When these rocky portions had been broken and crushed, the 
smaller pieces left out by mistake were also next broken. The smaller princes fell under the 
strokes of English perfidy, oppression, and tyranny. 
The English did not even feed well or pat on the back the brutes by whose strength they 
effected all these conquests. For a hundred years, they had been oppressing and maltreating 
27 
the sepoys in their army. When the soldiers of the Mahrattas or the Nizam won important 
victories, they used to get Jahgirs and rewards. But the Company gave nothing but ‘sweet 
words’ of praise. The sepoys, whose swords won India for the English, were so barbarously 
treated that General Arthur Wellesley would drive the wounded sepoys to the mouth of guns 
instead of sending them to the hospital ! 
While the English had thus been sowing the seeds of discontent and hatred in almost all parts 
of Hindusthan, the time soon came when it appeared that their efforts would soon be crowned 
with success. The danger to the independence of India was first perceived by Nana Farnavis 
of Poona and Hyder Sahib of Mysore. From that day onwards the presence of this danger 
began to be seen, faintly at least, by the princes of India; and its effect was markedly seen in 
the “mutiny” at Vellore. This rising at Vellore was a rehearsal of the great rising of 1857. Just 
as in a theatre, before the actual performance, several rehearsals have to be gone through, so 
in history, before the actual and final attainment of freedom, in order to harmonise the whole 
performance, several rehearsals in the shape of risings are necessary. In Italy, the rehearsals 
started as early as 1821, and only in 1861 was the play successful. The Rising at Vellore in 
1806 was such a rehearsal on a small scale. In this rising, the sepoys had been won over by 
the princes and people. At markets, preachers disguised as Fakirs were preaching. To indicate 
the time of rising, chapatees even had been distributed. Hindus and Mahomedans together 
had risen in the name of religion and liberty. But this being the first rehearsal, they fell even 
as they were rising. Never mind ! Before the final performance, how many rehearsals have to 
be gone through ! Only the actors should boldly stick to their tasks and never cease their 
rehearsals. And for producing this drama, both England and India were working day and 
night without rest. And those that were making ready to take part in the play were not 
common, poor, or ignorant folk. The Gadi of Tanjore, and Masnad of Mysore, the Raigarh of 
Sahyadri, the Dewan-I-Khas of Delhi were among the select actors. And to crown all, Lord 
Dalhousie landed on the shores of Hindusthan in 1846. There is not now much time left for 
commencing the task which was sworn to on the battlefield of Plassey. 
From the above chain of causes, it will be clearly seen that, before Dalhousie landed in India, 
the seeds of discontent had gone deep, very dedep, all over Hindusthan. Rajas and Maharajas, 
deprived of their kingdoms by the English, were burning in their hearts. The fact that the 
centenary of Plassey was approaching inspired a strange feeling of hope among the people; 
and in the very armies of the English, the sepoys were secretly chafing with rage and hatred. 
Even if India had had at this time a Viceroy who would strive to allay this secret discontent, it 
28 
is very doubtful how far his efforts would have been successful. The question now was not 
whether the Company’s rule should be good or bad; but the only question that used to be 
asked all over the country was whether the rule should exist at all. The one other force that 
was necessary for making an attempt to solve definitely this question was supplied when 
Dalhousie became viceroy; for he gave up the policy of coating poison pills with sugar before 
administering them to the victim, and began a system of open and direct oppression which 
did not fail to burn its way into the hearts of the masses. 
Lord Dalhousie is described, by English historians, as one of the founders of the English 
Empire. This fact alone is sufficient to form an estimate of his capacity and character. In a 
country where unjust wars of conquest and oppression of foreign nationalities and races are 
universally popular, it is no wonder that those who have committed the greatest injustice and 
oppression are the most honoured. Thus, he who is most unjust is deemed the most capable, 
and one has no better way of proving himself a great man in such a country than by 
committing a climax of injustice. In such an Empire, where there is such an emulation of 
injustice and oppression, Lord Dalhousie was given the significant title of a ‘founder’ ; it is 
impossible to find a more suitable word to describe his character. With the result of a hundred 
years of wicked English policy behind him, obstinate by nature, possessed of boundless self- 
confident, his flesh and blood permitted by the glory and pride of an unjust Empire, this bold, 
if not clever, man landed on the shores of out land saying openly, “I will level the land of 
Hindusthan.” 
As soon as Dalhousie landed, he saw at once that so long as Ranjit Singh’s lions lived in the 
Panjab, it was impossible to achieve, the object dear to his heart of levelling Hindusthan. He, 
therefore, determined to throw somehow or other the lion of the Panjab in the cage of 
Slavery. But the Panjab lion had no ordinary claws. Seeing his cave threatened, he rushed out 
of the lair at Chillianwalla and, with a terrible stroke of his paw, mauled the enemy and made 
him bleed. But, alas ! While the lion was standing at the mouth of the cave at Chillianwalla, a 
traitor broke open the back-wall at Guzerat and the lion was surprised and captured. Soon the 
cave of the lion became his cage ! Ranjit’s Queen, Chand Kuvar, dies rotting in London ! 
And the lion’s cub, Dhulip Singh, ate the beggar’s bread at the hands of the Feringhi enemy ! 
After the annexation of the Panjab, Lord Dalhousie wrote in his despatch, the proud sentence 
that the extent of the British Empire was now continuous from the Himalayas to Cape 
Comorin. But now that the British frontiers had been pushed to the Himalayas on the north 
29 
and to the seas on the south, it was inevitable that he should have an ambition to create an 
eastern and a western frontier suitable to these northern and southern ones. Then why delay ? 
Send a ‘peace’ mission to Burma and the work is done. This peace mission so tightly 
embraced the peace of Burma that its ribs were broken and it expired ! This very loving task 
was soon over and Burma was also annexed. Now at last, the whole of Hindusthan – from the 
Himalayas to Rameshwar and from the Sindhu to the Iravady became red – but, oh ! 
Dalhousie , do you not fear that it will soon be redder still ? 
Do we realise what is meant by the annexation of the Panjab and Burma ? We cannot form an 
idea of it from mere names. The Panjab alone is a territory of 50,000 sq. miles and a 
population of four millions ! It is the land watered by five sacred rivers of the Vedas, on the 
banks of which the Rishis in ancient times had recited sacred mantras ! To conquer such a 
region Alexander came from Greece, to defend such a region King Porus fought. After taking 
such a country, the ambition even of Ravana would have been satisfied; but the land-hunger 
of Dalhousie was not satisfied even after swallowing not only the Panjab but also the 
extensive dominion of Burma. Though the frontiers of India were extended, there still 
remained the graves of ancient kingdoms within. Dalhousie therefore began to root these out 
and level everything. Not only did they occupy too much valuable space, but there was the 
fear that from these graves might one day rise the future avengers of India’s wrongs. 
In the grave at Satara was buried a magnificent Hindu Empire. And it is no wonder that 
Dalhousie, who was a believer in the Resurrection of Jesus was afraid that out of Satara 
might rise a future Hindu Emperor who would confound the foreigner and establish Swaraj. 
In April 1848, Appa Sahib, the Maharaja of Satara, died. At this news, Dalhousie decided to 
annex that State. And what was the reason ? The king had no direct heirs ! Even the cottage 
of the village labourer who has no direct heir is not confiscated but is given to his adopted 
son or to his near relatives. And Satara was not a peasant’s cottage but an ‘ally’ of the 
English Government. In the year 1839, Pratap Singh Chhatrapati had been charged with 
having engaged in a conspiracy with the object of overthrowing the British Government, was 
dethroned, and in his place Chhatrapati Appa Sahib was appointed by the English Sirkar to succeed him.1 Mr. Arnold, in his book Dalhousie’s Administration, says “ It is not pleasant to 
1. The first article in the treaty entered into by the Sirkar with the Chhatrapati, when he was 
placed on the throne of Satara, runs as follows :- “ The valiant English Government on its 
part agrees to give the country or territory specified, to the Government or State of His 
30 Highness the Maharaja Chhatrapati (the Raja of Satara); His Highness the Maharaja 
Chhatrapati and His Highness’s sons and heirs and successors are perpetually, that is from 
generation to generation, to reign in sovereignty over the said territory.” 
dwell, on the circumstances of the dethronement – so discreditable they were.” After such 
shamelessly discreditable dethronement, the English established on the Gadi of Satara the 
brother, on account of the failure of legitimate sons. By this, the English practically 
acknowledged the right of other relations – as is the invariable law laid down by the Hindu 
Shastras – to succeed to the throne. The only truth about this whole affair is that Dalhousie, 
with the habitual treachery of his nation, overrode this open acknowledgement knowingly 
and deliberately, because it was profitable to do so. 
No one could under any pretext say that the English in any of the various treaties concluded 
with the various Rajas, had refused to acknowledge the right of adopted children to succeed 
to their adoptive parents’ thrones. In 1825, the Company, while acknowledging the right of 
the adopted child of the Raja of Kota to succeed, openly declared :- “The Prince of Kota must 
be considered to possess the right, in common with all other Hindus, of adopting a son and successor in conformity with the rules of the Shastras.” 2 
Again, in 1837, when the Raja of Oorcha adopted a successor, the English acknowledged him 
and promised :- 
“Hindu sovereigns have a right to adopt, to the exclusion of collateral heirs, and the British 
Government is bound to acknowledge the adoption, provided it is regular and not in violation of the Hindu law.”3 It may be safely asserted that nowhere else but in English politics could 
be found the audacity of denying the very existence of those promises which were given most 
definitely and which are contained in their own documents. Not only by these declarations 
but on innumerable other occasions, the English have acknowledged the right of the native 
princes to adopt in accordance with the Hindu Shastras. Suffice it to say that, within the short 
period of two years (1846-47), the English Government had consented to the succession to 
the Gadi of innumerable adopted sons, and acknowledged their rights. 
Indeed, to try to seek, in the language of promises and treaties, the root cause of annexing 
these states, is to work in a wrong direction altogether. The real truth of the matter is that 
Dalhousie had come to reduce all India to a dead level and the grave of the Hindu Empire at 
Sarata was trying to raise its head. Obviously, therefore, though Pratap Singh and Appa Sahib 
had both adopted in accordance with the Hindu Shastras, the English annexed the Raj under 
31 
3. Parliamentary Papers, 15th February, 1850, page 141. 
the pretext of failure to legitimate heirs. The Gadi of Satara ! The same Gadi on which 
Shivaji was crowned by the hand of Gaga Bhatt ! The same Gadi to which Baji Rao I. 
dedicated all his triumph, before which he bowed low ! O Maharashtra ! behold that same 
Gadi, on which Shivaji sat, and to which homage was paid by Santaji, Dhanaji, Niraji, and 
Baji, has been broken to pieces by Dalhousie ! Go on, if you will, with your petitions ad 
deputations. What if Dalhousie does not listen to these ? In England at least, you think, the 
Directors will listen to you ? Dalhousie is apparently a mere man; but, who knows, perhaps 
the Directors in England might be more than men. None in Maharashtra has seen these same 
Gods. It was, therefore, thought proper that Rango Bapuji, an excellent and loyal man, should 
go to England to lay the grievances of Satara before the ‘Home’ authorities. Success or no 
success, the game was at least, they thought, worth trying. But how long would they wait, 
hoping against hope, for the success of their mission ? For how long would Rango Bapuji go 
on wearing away the very pavement of Leadenhall Street ? Yes, Rango Bapuji will go on 
clinging to his impossible hope till he is mocked at and insulted, till every penny is spent in 
feeing English barristers with crores of Rupees so that he has not money left even for his 
passage, and until he receives the insolent reply that they refuse to give back Satara ! 
While Rango Bapuji was busy packing for London, Balhousie’s attention was being absorbed 
by a new affair; for, an occasion had risen by which he could weed out the miserable 
shrunken shrub of the Raj of Nagpur. Raghoji Bhonsle, the rightful owner of the Nagpur 
Gadi, died suddenly at the age of 47. The Raja of Berar was an ally of the Engliosh 
Government,4 and this very friendship of the English was the cause of his destruction! Those 
who knew that the English hated them were spared but all those who foolishly believed that 
the English were their friends were mercilessly and treacherously involved in ruin. The 
kingdom of the Berars was not the Englishman’s jahgir, nor was it a feudatory state 
dependent for its existence on his sweet will and pleasure. It was an independent state on an 
equality with the Feringhi Sirkar. J.Sylvian has defied the British Government to show on 
what grounds and by what show of justice, either eastern or western, they could have the right 
of annexing such a Raj, merely because the king died childless. Obviously it was a game of 
32 
4. The treaty of 1826 beging as follows :- Treaty of perpetual friendship between the 
Honourable East India Company and His Highness of Maharaja Raghoji Bhonsle, his heirs 
and successors. 
legerdemain or sleight-of-hand; one removes and the other, his accomplice, conceals it 
quietly ! While the opne cuts off the head, the other, his accomplice, goes on asking loudly by 
what law he dared commit the deed - as if murderers and highway robbers need the law to b 
back them up. In 1853, then Dalhousie at last laid his murderous knife at the throat of ‘his 
friend’, showing as a reason that the Raja had not adopted a successor. Raja Raghoji had 
every hope of a child but died suddenly. Even if he died without a child, the right of adopting 
passed at his death to his legal wife. If the English had not acknowledged at any time 
previously the heirs adopted by the queens of deceased Rajas, we should have had nothing to 
say. But it remains a fact that the English had acknowledged the adoption of Daulatrao 
Scindia’s widow in 1826, the adoption by Junkoji Scindia’s widow in 1836, the adoption by 
the widow of the Raja of Dhar in 1834, and the adoption by the queen of Kishengarh in 1841. 
Not one, not two, but many such adoptions have the English acknowledged. But we should 
not forget the fact that, on these occasions, it was to their advantage to acknowledge these 
heirs. In this case, on the other hand, it was not to their advantage to acknowledge the 
adoption by the widow of Raghoji. The real point at issue, then was one of advantage to the 
English Government, and everything was determined on that issue. While the Raj of Nagpur 
was annexed because no adoption took place, the Satara kingsom faced a similar fate because 
the adopted heir should have a right to succeed to the throne! Impossible for logic to step in 
here. 
By annexing Nagpur, Dalhousie robbed an extensive tract of 76,832 sq.miles, with a 
population of 4,650,000 people and an enormous annual income. While the poor Ranees were 
weeping themselves hoarse, a loud knock came on the palace gate. The door was opened and 
in rushed the English troops. Horses were let loose from the stables, elephants- after forcibly 
pulling down the Ranees riding on them – were taken to the bazaars for sale, and silver and 
gold ornaments were removed from the palace and were sold by public auction in every 
street. The necklace that adorned a queen was lying in the dust of the bazaars. Elephants were 
sold for 100 Rupees ! After this you will hardly be surprised to lean that horses, fed on richer 
food than Dalhousie had for his own dinners, were sold for 20 Rupees and that a pair of 
horses, on which the Raja himself used to ride, was sold for 5 Rupees! Elephants with the 
howdas on them and horses with caparisons were sold, but the Ranees still remained with 
their jewels. Why not sell the jewels ? So, the jewels also went the way of other things, and 
33 
no Ranee had a single jewel left on her person. But even here the “friendship” of the English 
could not stop. So, they began to dig the floor of the place ! And, Heavens, in the very 
bedroom of the Ranees the Feringhi pickaxe began its desecrating work ! Reader, start not 
yet, not tremble, for the pickaxe has only started the work, and will do further deeds, nay, is 
doing it. For, see you not it has broken the bedstead of the Queen, and is digging the very 
flooring underneath the bed ? And shall we say it ? All the while the Maharanee Anna Poorna 
Bai was on her death-bed, and was even then dying ! While the Dowager Queen of the great 
family of the Bhonsles of Nagpur was on her deathbed, groaning with agony and for the 
insult to the throne and the family, in the neighbouring room, in that bed of the Queen, the 
Feringhi’s pickaxe was doing its work ! What a terrible accompaniment to the groans in the next room ! And why all this ? Because Raghoji died before adopting a successor! 5 
Ranee Anna Poorna Bai died, groaning for the insufferable insults flung at her ancient 
dynasty. But the hope of Ranee Banka to get justice from England was not yet dead ! This 
vain hope was at last destroyed, but not until she had tried the immensely expensive remedy 
of feeing English barristers with lakhs of Rupees. Ands what did Ranee Banka do then ? She 
spent the rest of her life in “loyalty” to the Feringhi ! While the Lightning was working 
destruction at Jhansi, Banka, seeing that her sons were ready to unsheath their swords of 
Swaraj, threatened them that, if they did unsheath their swords, she would herself inform the Feringhis of their designs and advise the Feringhis to behead them !6 
34 
5. Balhousie’s Administration, pp. 165-168. 
6. Banka, thy name shall go down to History as Banka the treacherous. 
CHAPTER III NANA SAHIB & LAXMI BAI 
Blow your trumpets loudly now, O Heralds of History, for soon there are to arrive on the 
scene two great heroes ! These are two bright pearls in the necklace of Mother India. Now, 
then dark night has overspread the horizon of the whole country, these two alone are shining 
as luminous stars. They are fiery Akalis ready to avenge their country’s unjust wrong with the 
last drop of their blood. They are two martyrs sacrificing their lives for Country, Religion, 
and Freedom. They are two witnesses, sword in hand, to prove that the blood of Hindusthan 
that gave birth to Shivaji is not yet dead. They are two noble souls that could entertain in their 
hearts the grant and holy ambition of Swaraj. They are two crusaders in the Holy War, 
glorious even in their defeat. Therefore, O readers, stand up in all awe and reverence, for the 
noble figures of Nana Sahib Peshwa and the Queen of Jhansi are coming on the stage of 
History ! 
We do not know which to describe more – the splendour of the mountain tops of Matheran in 
the holy Maharashtra, or the green, velvet-soft, grassy meadows adorning the feet of those 
hiolls. In the lap of the graceful plateau below, almost overhung by the sky-reaching peaks of 
the Matheran, there nestled a tiny little village called Venu, heightening the beauty of the 
already beautiful region. Among the old and respectable families of Venu, the family of 
Madhavrao Narayan Bhatt was the most prominent. Madhavrao and his noble wife Gangabai, 
though living in circumstances of domestic poverty, were happy in the enjoyment of mutual 
love. In the small house of this good family, all factrs beamed with joy and happiness in 
1824, for the good Gangabai had given birth to a son. That son of Madhavrao and Gangabai 
was no other than the Peshwa Nana Sahib, at the very sound of whose name the Feringhi 
shudders with fear, - that same Nana who has made his name immortal in history as a hero 
who fought for liberty and for his country. 
About the same time, the last Bajirao had abdicated his throne and was leading a life of 
retirement on the banks of Ganges. Many Maratha families had followed him and, hearing 
that Bajirao was generous enough to support them in good state on his pension, many new 
35 
families also emigrated thither. Among the latter was the family of Madhavrao, who went to 
Brahmavarta in 1827 to seek the generosity of Bajirao. There, the little son of Madhavrao 
captivated the heart of Bajirao, and little Nana Sahib became a great favourite of the whole 
Durbar. His spirit even in childhood, his serious mien and his intelligence made a deep impression upon Bajirao, who eventually resolved to adopt him. On the 7th of June, 1827, 
Bajirao formally placed him on his lap and adopted him. At this time Nana was only two- 
and-a-half years old. In this manner, the child born in the village of Venu became, by a stroke 
of luck, the heir presumptive to the throne of the Peshwas ! 
It was no doubt a great good fortune to be made heir to the seat of the Peshwas of the 
Mahratta Empire. But, O brilliant Prince, do you realise the great responsibility 
accompanying this good fortune ? The throne of the Peshwas is not an ordinary thing ! It was 
on this that the great Baji sat and ruled an Empire. It was for this that the battle of Paniput 
was fought. On this have been poured the sacred waters of the Sindhu for the anointing of 
generations of Peshwas; on this the treaty of Wargaon had been made and, most important of 
all, on this is to come, or any, already has come, the contaminating touch of slavery. Do you 
realise all this ? To be the heir to a throne is to undertake, to guarantee, the protection and 
dignity of that throne. Then will you or will your not guard the dignity of the Peshwa throne ? 
Either the Gadi should be adorned with the crown of victory, or it should be burnt in a 
brilliant pyre of glory, like the proud women of Chitore ! There is no third way of saving the 
glory of the Peshwa’s throne ! O brilliant Prince ! Think of this terrible responsibility, and 
then site on the Gadi of the Peshwas ! Since your father gave reason for the taunt that the 
Peshwa’s Gadi surrendered, the whole of Maharashtra has became black with shame, and all 
desire that if the Gadi is to enter after all, it should end even as it began – that if it is to die, it 
should die fighting ! Sit proudly on that Gadi, O young Nana, so that History may say with 
pride that the Gadi, whose first Peshwa was Balaji Vishvanath, had for its last occupant Nana 
Sahib ! 
At about the same time in sacred Varanasi, there lives in the retinue of Chimnaji Appa 
Peshwa, Moropant Tambe and his wife Bhagirathi Bai. Little did the couple know at the time 
that their name would become immortal in History ! This couple, which had the good fortune 
of giving birth to a daughter who was to be a veritable flashing sword in the hands of 
Hindusthan, this couple hardly understood its good fortune. Do the thorny branches know 
that, in the spring, a rose, delighting all with its fragrance, would spring forth from out of 
them ! But though the branches knew it now, still, as soon as the spring time of Hindusthan 
36 
came, the flower did come forth ! It was in 1835 that Bhagirathi gave birth to the heroine, 
Ranee Lakshmi Bai. This brave woman’s name in youth was Manu Bai. 
When Manu was hardly three or four years old, the whole family left Benares and went to the 
court of Bajirao at Brahmavarta. There she was so much liked by all the people that they 
called here “Chabeli”. Prince Nana Sahib and the sweet Chabeli ! When two such children 
braced each other in childish affection, what a sight must it have been to the people of 
Brahmavarta ! What eyes would not glisten with joy to see Prince Nana Sahib and the 
Chabeli playing together in the armoury and learning their lessons in sword-play – lessons 
which they were destined to use in later life for the defence of their country and their 
religion? How limited, indeed, is the vision of man ! When Nana Sahib and Lakshmi Bai 
were learning sword-play together, the spectators did not see the future glory of these brilliant 
children, and now those who do see their glory, have no longer the good fortune to see those 
children’s games of the past ! Still, if, to remove the short-sightedness of these eyes of flesh, 
we put on the spectacles of imagination, then we can easily see those games of the past. 
While Nana Sahib and Rao Sahib (his cousin) were learning their lessons under their tutor, 
this Chabeli too would closely watch them, and thus she learned to read, though stumbling 
often. Nana Sahib would be sitting in howdah on an elephant and the sweet child would affectionately call up to him, “Won’t you take me too ?”1 Sometimes Nana would lift her up, 
and both would learn to ride the magnificent animal. Sometimes Nana would be on a horse 
and wait for Lakshmi to come and join him ; just then she would come up galloping with a 
sword at her side, with her hair slightly dishevelled by the wind, and her hair complexion 
becoming ruddier by her efforts to curb the spirited horse. And both would start away at a 
smart pace. As this time, Nana was eighteen years old and Lakshmi Bai was seven; what a 
pleasant memory to us that the heroine should have started her training for the holy was at the 
age of seven ? These two jewels were extremely fond of each other from their earliest 
childhood. In Brahmavarta, at that time, were being brought up three of the most important 
characters of the Revolutionary War of 1857, Nana Sahib, Queen Lakshmi Bai, and Tatya 
Tope. It is said, that on every festival of Yamadvitiya, these two, Nana Sahib and Lakshmi 
Bai – historical brother and sister- used to perform the ceremony of Bhaubij. We can well 
picture to ourselves the sweet attractive spirited Chabeli, with a golde dish and with lamps in 
her hand, performing the ceremony. Such occasions when a Lakshmi Bai is waving the 
sacred lamp round the face of a Nana Sahib, such occasions make history more romantic than 
romance ! 
37 
1. Parasnis’s Life of the Queen of Jhansi. 
In the early life of Nana Sahib and Manu Bai, we have the key to their future greatness. Their 
flesh and blood, even in early childhood, had been permeated by the love of Swaraj and a 
noble sense of self-respect and pride of ancestry. In 1842, the Chabeli was given In marriage 
to Maharaja Gangadhar Rao Baba Sahib of Jhansi, and thus became Maharani Lakshmi Bai 
of Jhansi. She was extremely popular at the Court of that place and gained the affection and 
devoted loyalty of all her subjects, as the later part of this history will show. 
In 1851, the Peshwa Bajirao II died. Let not a single tear be shed for his death ! For, after 
losing his own kingdom in 1818, this blot in the escutcheon of the Peshwas spent his time in 
helping to ruin the kingdoms of other kings ! He saved considerably on the pension of eight 
lakhs of Rupees allowed to him by the Company’s Government, and invested it in the notes 
of the Company. Later when the English went to war with Afghanistan, he helped them with 
a loan of fifty lakhs out of his savings. Soon after, the English went to war with the Sikh 
nation of the Panjab. And all were in hopes, and the English in fears, that the Mahratta at 
Brahmavarta would make common cause with the Sikh Misals against the English power. 
When almost the whole of India was fighting against Aurangzeb, Shri Guru Govind Singh, 
after a defeat in the Panjab, had come into the Maharashtra, it is said, to enter into an active 
alliance with the Mahrattas. Now it seemed that the Mahrattas would go into Northern India 
on a similar mission, and perform the unfulfilled promises of the alliance. But Baji spoiled 
the sport at the eleventh hour. This Baji - this Peshwa of Shivaji and his descendants – spent 
money out of his own pocket and sent one thousand infantry and one thousand cavalry to the 
assistance of the English ! This Bajirao had not troops enough to help the enemy to desecrate 
the house of Guru Govind Singh ! O unfortunate nation ! The Mahrattas should take the 
kingdom of the Sikhs and the Sikhs should take the kingdom of the Mahrattas – and all this 
for what ? In order that the English might dance in joy over the corpses of both. We have 
rather to thank the God of Death that such a traitor – this Baji – died before 1857. 
Before his death, Baji Rao made a will by which he bequeathed all the rights of succession 
and powers of the Peshwa to his adopted son Nana Sahib. But immediately on the news of 
Baji Rao’s death, the English Government announced that Nana Sahib had no right 
whatsoever to the pension of eight lakhs. What must have Nana Sahib thought on hearing this 
decision of the English ? The conflict of passions in his heart is portrayed to some extent in 
38 
the despatch written under his direction. It says : “It is simply unjust that the high family of 
thePeshwa should be treated by the Company so lightly as this. When our throne and 
kingdom were handed over to the Company by Shrimant Bajirao, it was done so on the 
condition that the Company should pay eight lakhs of Rupees every year, as its price. If this 
pension is not to last for ever, how can the surrender of the kingdom, which was given as a 
consideration for this pension, last for ever in your hands ? That one party alone should be 
bound by the contract, while the other itentionally fails to do its part is absurd, unjust, and inconsistent.”2 Then follows a clear and well reasoned passage refuting the theory that he, 
being an adopted son, cannot get his father’s rights, citing authorities from Hindu Shastras, 
from rules of politics and customary law. After that, the despatch of Nana Sahib continues :- 
“The Company puts forward another excuse to cease to pay the pension, namely that Bajirao 
II has saved a considerable sum which is quite sufficient to defray the expenses of his family. 
But the Company forgets that the pension was given as a condition of the treaty, and there is 
no single clause in the treaty directing the mode in which the pension should be spent. The 
pension is the price of the kingdom given, and Bajirao would have been justified had he 
saved even the whole of the pension ! We ask the Company whether they have got the least 
right to question the manner in which the pension is expended ? Nay, can the Company ask 
even its own servants as to how they spend their pensions or what they save out of it ? But it 
is strange that a question, which the Company dare not ask even of its own servants, is raised 
in the case of the heir to a royal dynasty, and is made the pretence to break a treaty.” With 
this argumentative and spirited despatch, Nana’s faithful ambassador, Azimullah Khan, left 
for England. 
Of the important characters in the Revolutionary War of 1857, the name of Azimullah Khan 
is one of the most memorable. Among the keen intellects and minds that first conceived the 
idea of the War of Independence, Azimullah must be given a prominent place. And among 
the many plans by which the various phases of the Revolution were developed, the plans of 
Azimullah deserve special notice. 
Azimullah was very poor by birth. He rose gradually on the strength of his own merits, and at 
last became the trusted adviser of Nana Sahib. His early poverty was such that he served as a 
waiter in the household of an Englishman. Even while in such a low state, the fire of ambition 
was always burning in his heart. He took advantage of his profession as a Baberchi in order 
to learn foreign languages, and in a short time he had learned to speak English and French 
with fluency. After acquiring a knowledge of both these languages, Azimullah left the service 
39 
2. Nana’s Claims against the East India Company. 
of the Feringhis and began to study in a school at Cawnpore. By his extraordinary ability, he 
soon became a teacher at the self-same school. While still serving as a teacher in the 
Government school at Cawnpore, his reputation as an able scholar reached the ears of Nana 
Sahib, and he was introduced at the Brahmavarta Durbar. Once, at the Durbar, his wise 
counsels were appreciated and valued by Nana Sahib, who would take no important step 
without first consulting Azimullah. In 1854, he was made the chief representative of Nana 
Sahib and sent to England. His face was noble, his speech sweet and silvery. Knowing very 
well the customs and manners of contemporary English life, he soon became very popular 
among Londoners. Attracted by his pleasant and silvery voice, his spirited mien and Oriental 
magnificence, several young English women well in love with Azimullah. There used to be a 
crowd, in those days, in the parks of London and on the beach at Brighton, to see this 
jewelled Indian “Raja”. Some English women of respectable families were so much 
infatuated with him that, even after his return to India, they would send him letters couched in 
the most affectionate terms. When, later, Havelock’s army captured Brahmavarta, he saw 
there the original letters written by some English ladies to their “Darling Azimullah !” 
But though English women were captivated by Azimullah, still the East India Company 
would not leave their stern attitude. They put him off for some time with beguiling words, 
and at last gave the stereotyped answer, “We entirely approve of the decision of the 
Governor-General that the adopted so of Bajirao has no claim whatsoever to his father’s 
pension.” Thus, as regards the principal object of his mission he was disappointed, in a way. 
We say “in a way”; because at this very moment, a new inspiration, a new hope, was rising in 
his heart. There was no necessity of any foreigner’s consent to realise this hope, but it 
depended for its realisation on his own country and countrymen ! How to get the consent of 
his own men ? How to acquire the independence of his country by force when it could not be 
acquired by Sama, Dana, or Bheda (conciliation, money, or division) ? These thoughts 
breathed a new hope and a new life into Azimullah’s heart. 
At this self-same moment, right in the heart of London, a Brahmin was sitting, brooding over 
the means for attainment of that which he was unable to obtain by petition or by prayer and 
his heart, filled with vengeance born of despair, was planning dozens of schemes for the 
attainment of his object. This was Rango Bapuji of Satara. Azimullah, the representative of 
40 the Peshwa, used often to visit him, and they both used to hold secret consultations. Leaving 
these two- one, the representative of the Chhatrapati of Satara himself, and the other, the 
representative of the Prime Minister of the Chhatrapati – to the quiet and secret revolution of 
the problem of saving the Hindu Empire, let us turn our attention to the activities of Nana 
Sahib. 
Fortunate will be the day when a complete and systematic history of the life of Shrimant 
Nana Sahib Peshwa will be before the world. Meanwhile, until such a day arrives, it would 
not be out of place to recount in brief some of the details of his life about this period, as 
published by the English historians, bitter enemies of Nana Sahib as they are. We have 
already related incidentally the story of his youth. He had married a cousin of the chief of 
Sangli. While in the north, in 1857, the Revolution was being resolved upon, this relation of 
Nana Sahib was making strenuous efforts to achieve the same end in Maharashtra by working 
in the Poatwardhan State. Nana had made Brahmavarta his home after the demise of his 
father. This city was in itself very beautiful, while the sacred Bhagirathi which flowed close 
to the city walls greatly added to its beauty. The palace of Nana commanded a most charming 
view; before him stretched the quite waters of the Bhagirathi; the banks were cheerfully alive 
with throngs of men and women; and beautiful temples of fames architecture raised their 
cupolas all along the banks. The Palace of the Peshwa was a grant structure. Its political, 
administrative, and other offices, and the large shops and well-kept roads inside the gates, 
amply testified to the activities within the palace. The many extensive halls within this palace 
were decorated with rich carpets and gorgeous tapestries. Most valuable china selected with 
faultless taste, magnificent candelabra studded with diamonds, beautifully carved mirrors, 
carved ivory of finest workmanship, gold art works richly set with diamonds, in short, all the luxury and taste and splendour of the Hindu palace were to be seen there.3 The steeds and 
camels of Shrimant Nana Saheb were caparisoned in silver. Nana’s fondness for horses was 
well known, and it is said that none could excel either him or Lakshmi Bai in horsemanship. 
His stables were a fine collection of splendid breeds. His special hobby was animals, and 
people even from far-off parts used to come to Brahmavarta, to see his deer and his gazelles 
brought from various parts of India, his camels, and his pointers. Yet, be it noted that, above 
all things, it was on his splendid collection of arms that Shrimant prided himself most. It 
included arms of all kinds and for all purposes,- swords of best-tempered steel, modern long- 
range rifles, and big guns of various sizes. 
41 
3. See Thomson’s Cawnpore. Peculiar importance attaches to this man and his book owing to 
the fact that he was one of the two men who survived the massacre at Cawnpore. 
Immensely proud of his high birth and conscious of his noble ancestry, Nana had quietly 
made up his mind that he would either live as became that noble parentage, or pass away 
from memory altogether. It is a significant fact, that in the main hall and in a prominent place were hund the portraits of those great and capable men who had adorned Mahratta history.4 
What did those faces speak to him ? What did the portrait of Chhatrapati Shivaji say to him? 
What a tumult of feelings must have arisen in his mind when he saw Baji Rao I, the Bhao of 
Panipat, the youthful and regal Viswas, the wise Madhava, and statesman Nana Farnavis, in 
the portraits before him ! The very consciousness that he was born in a family which would 
boast of such great names, must have been constantly impelling him to, what thoughts ? 
Nana, there is no doubt, must have felt, and felt terribly, the woeful humiliation of petitioning 
to his enemies for a pension for that Empire, of which his ancestors were the Prime Ministers, 
nay, rulers. The stories of the noble deeds of the great Shivaji, whose memory he fondly 
cherished, must, without doubt, have set ablaze in his heart the flames of anger and 
vengeance. A Sanskrit proverb says, “The honourable prefer death to dishonour,” and Nana 
was above all honourable. Generous as a prince, pride was his greatest wealth – as it always 
is of the brave. Hence he could not bear the idea of accepting any invitation from the 
European officers about him. For was he not, as the Peshwa, entitled to the salute of gunds, 
which the Company was not willing to fire in his honour ? He was serious constitutionally and his habits were simple. He had not a trace of extravagant habits or vices.5 An Englishman 
who had observed him closely on many occasions says that, at the time he saw him, he was 
really about twenty-eight years of age, but he looked forty. “He was inclined to embonapoint; 
his face was round; his eyes, restless like those of a tiger, were piercing and of great lustre; 
his complexion was like that of any Spaniard; his conversation was characterised by a touch of humour.”6 In the Durbar, he was dressed in kinkhabs. Englishmen used to admire the 
jewellery he displayed about his person and his crowns studded with diamonds. His generous 
and sympathetic heart, had effectually won the love of his subjects. His kindness to his 
subjects would be quite natural, but it is significant that Shrimant was habitually generous 
even towards those very English people, who, turning ungrateful, had deprived him of his all. 
If any youthful English couple wanted change of air, the rich equipage of Maharaja Nana 
4. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, page 304. 
42 
5. “A quiet and unostentatious young man not at all addicted to any extravagant habits.”- Sir 
John Kaye. 
6. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore, pages 68-69. 
Sahib was ready at their service. Many a “Sahib”, tired of living in Cawnpore, used to pay a 
visit with his “memsahib” to the town of Maharaja Nana Sahib, and presents to rich shawls 
and valuable pearls and diamonds were made to them on the occasion of their leavingBrahmavarta.7 It may be seen clearly from this that the poison of individual hatred 
never touched the noble soul of Nana. The elevated and heroic ideal, of generously treating 
those very enemies with social courtesy and obligation, whom, on the battlefield, you would 
remorselessly destroy, has again and again been celebrated in the epics and histories of 
Hindusthan. The Rajput heroes used to treat their bitterest enemies with splendid generosity. 
Be it noted, therefore, in this connection, that there was considerable cordiality between Nana and the English at this time.8 As long as they could feast at the palace of the Shrimant, the 
English officers and their wives were heaping friendly praise upon him, but as soon as he 
lifted the Sword of righteousness in the cause of Swaraj and Swadesh on the battlefield of 
Cawnpore, what ignominy and what low abuse they heaped on him ! 
Shrimant was well educated, and had the refinement of culture. He took great interest in 
politics and political affairs. He used to watch and closely study the ever-changing affairs of 
great nations, and for that purpose would closely follow the English press. He used to have 
the daily papers read to him every morning by Mr.Tod, an Englishman afterwards massacred 
at Cawnpore. He thus was able to observe, with his lynx-eye, all the political changes in 
England and in India. When heated discussions were taking place over the question of annexing Oudh, Nana was of opinion that that act would inevitably force on a war.9 
As this description is compiled from the histories written by Nana’s enemies, it is to be noted 
that those virtues which his enemies ascribe to him must have been a distinct feature in his 
character. For it cannot be expected that English historians, with their terrible hatred for 
Nana, could acknowledge willingly his eminent virtues except where absolutely necessary. 
7. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore, pages 68-69. 
8. ‘Nothing could exceed the cordiality which he constantly displayed in his intercourse with 
our countrymen. The persons in authority placed an implicit confidence in his friendliness 
43 
and good faith, and the ensigns emphatically pronounced him a capital fellow.”- Trevelyan’s 
Cawnpore. 
9. Charles Ball’s India Mutiny, Vol.I, p.304. 
The tardy acknowledgment of such virtues is the more significant, as after this slight 
confession of truth, these very historians have wreaked to the full their devilish vengeance on 
Nana for having leaped forth into the battlefield. The poisonous pen of English historians has 
taken a fiendish delight in calling him a “badmash”, a “high way robber”, a “fiend”, and 
“Satan”, and has been heaping upon him low, vulgar, and dishonest abuse. But even if all this 
abuse was deserved, still the single fact, that Nana fought for Swarajya and bled for Swadesh, 
is sufficient to establish his loving memory in the heart of us Indians. It was essentially 
necessary that the whole world should realise the fact that a grant and terrible vengeance is 
visited sooner or later on those who dare to commit the sin of depriving Hindusthan of 
Independence. Nana was the incarnation of vengeance of the land of Hind ! Nana was the 
Narasimha Mantra of this land ! Yes; this one fact will impress Nana’s memory on the tablet 
of our hearts ! Yet with this particular merit of Nana, when one further remembers the 
individual instances of his generosity, his pride of birth, and above all his noble and patriotifc 
heart, one’s head bows in loving adoration of that grant personality; and then rises before 
one’s mind’s eye the fair and noble form of Nana, with his huge strength, crown on his head, 
his bright and alert eyes red with injured pride, the sword (worth three lakhs of Rupees) by 
his side keen and ready to leap forth from the scabbard, and his body all aflame with anger 
and keen desire to avenge the Swarajya and the Swadesh ! 
Ye, conflicting emotions, stop ! What a terrible tumult is happening there ! The insolent 
message, the last, has come to Nana from the English, that he has not a vestige of claim to 
the pension of Baji Rao; nay, that he must even give up the proprietary rights to Brahmavarta; 
and this, the Company further claimed, was justice ! Justice ? Now the English need not take 
the trouble of giving a definite reply whether it was justice or injustice ! Extensive 
preparations are in progress and there, on the field of Cawnpore, will be determined the issue 
of the question. It is there that the question, whether it is justice or injustice to injure the heart 
of a Mahratta, will be fully discussed. Decapitated, headless trunks, mutilated bodies, flowing 
streams of blood – these will determine the issue. Aye, and the vultures sitting on the parapets 
of the well of Cawnpore will listen to this discussion and give a definite answer to the issue 
raised, Justice or Injustice ? 
44 
While splendid preparations were being made for this extraordinary ceremony at Nana’s 
palace, his Chhabeli sister was not sitting idle. Before her had come the same question – 
Justice or Injustice ? When she adopted her darling Damodar as her son, soon after the 
sudden death of her husband in 1853, the English annexed Jhansi, refusing to recognise the 
rights of adoption. But Jhansi was not a state which could be annexed by mere word or letter. 
Not the Banka of Nagpur, but the dear sister Chhabeli of Nana – Ranee Lakshmi Bai was 
ruling there ! As if she cared a whit for this “annexation” ! From her proud heart, seeing this 
low and heartless cunning of the English, pealed forth the thunders born of injured pride and 
a sense of honour, and through these the lightning of Jhansi declared, “Give up my Jhansi ? – I will not ! Let him try to take who dares !!” “Meri Jhansi doongi nahin !!” 10. 
45 
10. Dalhousie’s Administration, Vol. II. CHAPTER IV AYODHYA 
We have no hesitation in saying that Lord Dalhousie is one of those Indian administrators 
who are accused of more sing of administration than they are really guilty of. Officers like 
Dalhousie are nothing more than mouthpieces of tyrany. They merely execute the commands 
of the ‘Home’ authorities. To refer all responsibility for tyrannous misdeeds committed in 
India to such mouth-pieces would be as unjust as it is irrational. Dalhousie was purely a 
creature of the circumstances in which he was placed. The major portion of the responsibility, 
for good as well as for evil, therefore, rests on those who created the situation. As long as the 
general policy is dictated from ‘Home’, those whose duty is merely to execute it can act no 
more honestly than Dalhousie did. It would certainly be unjust to hold Dalhousie 
responnsible for all those combined acts and deeds which had to flow directly from the 
situation created for him by his masters in England and his assistants in India. Dalhousie 
merely reaped that harvest of political robbery the seeds of which had been sedulously sown 
for a hundred years by his predecessors. The intrigues born of political avarice had been sown 
long before and Dalhousie’s regime was the season in which they bore fruit. But for this 
heritage of iniquitous power behind him, how many kingdoms could Dalhousie have 
annexed? It was chiefly because generations of his predecessors had prepared the way for 
him by slowly undermining the foundations of the different kingdoms of India that Dalhousie 
was enabled, by the mere stroke of his pen, to annex so many of them. 
It was in 1764 that the relations between the Company and the ruler of Outh were first 
established. Since then, the servants of the Company had been steadily trying to usurp the 
fertile land of Ayodhya. Having first compelled the Nabob of Oudh to keep English 
regiments in his pay for ‘protecting’ him, they obtained from him in return Rs. 16 lakhs 
(160,000) per annum as the pay for these regiments. By such forced protection and voluntary 
compulsion, the treasury of the Nabob was rapidly emptied; and then the English suggested 
to the Nabob (it was a veiled command) that a replacing of all the native army of the Nabob 
by English regiments would be a valuable step towards the effectual ‘protection’ of the 
46 
principality. A treasury which could not afford to pay even the pay of the “subsidised troops” 
could certainly not pay the salaries of the “additional” troops forced on the Nabob, and the 
English thoroughly knew this fact. Indeed, the additional demand was made because the 
English knew this fact. At last it was forced (most unwillingly!) upon the notice of the 
Company that, if the Nabob had an empty treasury, he had at least a tract of territory and, so, 
with the sold object of looking after the welfare and well-being of the Nabob, the 
Companydeprieved him, at once and for ever, of a territory yielding a new revenue of about 
two crores of Rupees ( 2,000,000) and forced him to accept the services of this extensive 
army of English soldiers. This territory was the land of Rohilkhand and the Doab. 
After robbing all this land from the territory of Oudh, the English signed an agreement that, 
as the Nabob had surrendered all and every right over this tract of land, the rest of the 
territory belonging to the Nabob should remain hereditarily in the family of the Nabob. 
Another article in the treaty provided that the Nabob should not oppress his subjects. After 
this treaty which was concluded in 1801, the Nabob was made to advance to the Company, 
whenever they wanted financial aid, crores of Rupees. The whole kingdom of Oudh was in 
the hands of the Compoany’s army officers, the treasury became empty by forced loans and 
contributions, and it was impossible for the Nabob to administer his territory independently 
or to introduce internal reforms. But the philanthropic Company kept on urging upon him, 
pointing to the articles in the treary of 1801, to alter his administration so as to make his 
subjects happy and contended. How was it possible for the Nabob to do so ? The Company 
thwarted all his efforts to reform the finances. Those old laws in the kingdom which esured 
the happiness of the people were abolished by the Company and new ones were introduced. 
The subjects so much in consequence of these new laws that even the Company had to 
acknowledge its mistake and did do so ten years after. Thus, while on the one hand the 
Company unlawfully interfered in the internal administration of the kingdom, on the other 
hand it insisted that the subjects of the Nabob should have no complaints. They first made 
him empty his treasury to satisfy their exorbitant demands; and when, to satisfy their further 
demands which they insisted on being satisfied at once, the Nabob taxed his subjects, down 
comes the Company on the Nabob’s poor devoted head and charges him with 
maladministration, because, forsooth, the subjects complained against the new taxes. The 
Nabob’s administration was thus paralysed, but, at the same time, if by any chance the 
people, with one voice, rose against the injustice and attempted to get a reform of the 
constitution, English bayonets and swords of the “subsidised” troops were ever ready to 
smother the united voice of the nation. And still, the Company persisted in requiring that 
47 
there should be no complaints in the kingdom ! Thus, while on the one hand they rendered it 
more and more impossible either for the Nabob or the people to reform the administration in 
any way, on the other hand their strict and persistent demands for a better administration 
grew steadily louder and louder ! “As a matter of fact, the true and effectual way for the 
introduction of an administration which would render the people happy would have been to 
call the British Resident back and to given the Nabob a free hand in the administration of his 
dominion. Thus, the whole guilt of the unrest in his territory rests on the head of the Company”.1 Such is the clear and unmistakable evidence of Lord Hastings. But in spite of 
this, the Company threatened that, if the Nabob did not render his administration conducive 
to the happiness of his subjects, the Company would consider it a violationof the treaty of 
1801. 
This treaty of 1801 was cancelled and the Nabob entered into a fresh agreement in 1837. This 
treaty impaired the authority of the Nabob considerably, but he signed the new agreement 
simply with the intention of rescuing himself from the cunning treaty of 1801. In the year 
1847, Wajid Ali Shah succeeded to the throne of Oudh. This new Nabob determined from the 
first to destroy the poisonous white worm which was killing the life out of the state, and with 
that object began reforms in the army which was the life of the kingdom. This youthful prince 
introduced strict regulations as to the discipline of the Sepoys and even personally supervised 
their drill. All the regiments had to undergo the drill every morning before the Nabob, who 
used to dress in the uniform of the commander-in-shift of the troops. He issued strict orders 
that every regiment that was late in presenting itself on the parade ground should be liable to 
a fine of Rs.2000 ( 200) and he, at the same time, bound himself to pay the same amount as fine if he himself failed in this duty.2 
The Company, of course, could not bear to see the Nabob develop his strength. The British 
Resident, therefore in a short time forced the Nabob to give up these military activities and at 
the same time suggested that, if he so desired to increase the strength of the army, the 
Company was quite willing to increase the “subsidiary” force; the only condition they would 
impose being that the Nabob should, every year, pay a further additional sum towards its 
expenses and upkeep. The hotblooded Nabob was quite indignant. But he was forced to give 
up his darling scheme of military reform and was reduced to complete inactivity. Yet, the 
benevolent East India Company went on arguing that the Nabob should render his 
administration happy to his subjects. 
48 
1. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p.152. 
2. Native Narratives of the Mutiny by Metcalfe, pp.32-33. 
But now, the Nabob need ot even think as to how to render his rule happy. For Lord 
Dalhousie has arrived in India with the express and benevolent object of taking upon himself 
(as representative of the E.I.Coy.) all the responsibility for the good administration of all the 
independent states of India. With his keen political insight, Lord Dalhousie soon realised that 
the treaty of 1837 was, as a matter of fact, a great blunder. For in the annulment of the old 
treaty was lost a very strong and a very hypercritical reason for the annexation of the 
idependent principality of Oudh. The article in the treaty of 1801, demanding that the Nabob 
should rule for the happiness of his subjects, was an incontrovertible argument for annexing 
Oudh at the sweet will of the Company. How could this mistake of 1837 be repaired ? Why, 
by simply denying the fact that the treaty was ever entered into. Without any indirect 
methods, the Nabob was informed that no such treaty as the one of 1837 was ever entered 
into. A short time after the treaty of 1837, the English, as it would appear, remembered the 
treaty perfectly well. Indeed in 1847, Loard Hartington had publicly and unmistakably 
acknowledged this treaty. Col.Sleeman in 1851 had further testified to the treaty. Nay, in that 
very year 1853, not only was mention made of this treaty, but it was actually appended to the list of the existing treaties in the Company’s records for that year !3 So the English denied, 
aye, altogether, that there was ever any such treaty : - the very existence of a treaty which 
they had acknowledged just a minute before was denied by them even before the pen which 
had written the acknowledgment had been laid down ! And thus, Wajid Ali Shah was 
informed that the Company would consider it necessary to take over the administration of his 
kingdom if he did not introduce the happy regime ! 
But it must not be forgotten that all these important issues had been decided on long before 
Dalhousie even reached the shores of Hindusthan. All his predecessors, moved by unholy 
designs, had prepared the way to swallow this province, and their endeavours, characterised 
by low cunning, had almost succeeded. To Dalhousie was reserved the last act of 
consummation, the last stroke of policy and this absorbed all his attention. It would have been 
out of the question to “conquer” Oudh by sending an expedition into the territory as was 
done in the case of the Panjab or Brahmadesh (Burma), for as yet not a single man in the 
Oudh territory was for the English. The charge that the Nabab did not carry out the friendly 
49 
intentions he professed was also out of the question, for had not the Nabob helped the 
English on all occasions, when help was needed ? And had not the Nabob freely supplied the 
3. Dalhousie’s Administration, Vol.II, p.367. 
English with money from his pocket ? Had he not supplied the English even with provisions, 
when they were pressed hard in many of their campaigns ? 
Nor could there be any excuse, as in the case of Nagpur, that the Nabob had no direct heir; 
the palace was full of the Nabob’s legitimate children. Nor was there trouble about adoption 
as in the case of Jhansi, for the present king was the legitimate son of the late king and had, 
further, sat on the throne for years. In short the Nabob of Oudh had not committed any of the 
above “crimes” which cost other princes their kingdoms. But though the Nabob had thus 
avoided every other “crime”, still the demented fool had committed one unpardonable crime ! 
What crime could cry louder than this, that the land of Oudh was very fertile, teeming with 
crops and rich in every way ? Even the dry language of the Blue Book has broken forth into 
poetic eloquence when describing the beautiful and rich land of Oudh ! 
The Blue Book says :- “In this beautiful land, everywhere within twenty feet, and in some 
placed even within ten feet, of the surface, there is a plentiful supply of water. This splendid 
tract is most charming, nodding with whole forests of tall and towering bamboo trees, cooled 
by the share of mango trees and green with rich and verdant crops. The deep shade of the 
tamarind, the fragrance of the orange trees, the rich hue of the fig trees, and the sweet all- 
pervading scent of the pollen of flowers lend an additional glory to a scene naturally 
beautiful!” 
That no wise Englishman should hesitate to pull down a Nabob who was guilty of such an 
enormity as possessing such a beautiful tract of territory all for himself, Dalhousie realised 
but too well and so, in the year 1856, the fiat went forth that Oudh was to be annexed. And 
what was the reason alleged ? Of course this, that the Nabob was not reforming his 
administration. 
But, England couldst justify thy rule over India for a day, if thou acknowledgest the plea of 
unrest and maladministration as sufficient ? There is the vice of opium-eating in China, 
absolute rule in Afghanisthan, why, under thy very nose Russia has reached a climax of 
lawlessness and tyranny; yet couldst thou dare for that reason to drag the Chinese Emperor 
50 and the Amir and the Tsar from their thrones and annex their kingdoms ? How couldst though 
acquire the right of gagging the mouth of your neighbour and binding his hands and feet and 
taking possession of his house, because, forsooth, he kept his things not quite in proper order? 
Even the treaty of 1801 did not give the Company the right of annexing Oudh under any 
circumstances. And was not that very absence of good administration, at which the Company 
pretended so much indignation, a thing brought about by their own agency? Arnold, the 
biographer of Dalhousie and the historian of his regime, asserts that the Nabob of Oudh was 
guilty of many a crime basides that ! In the first place, he used to give presents of shawls to his servants of either sex; further that he has a fireworks display on the 11th of May; why, 
more – one morning he urged Shah Begum and Taj Begum to a dinner ! What more horrible 
crime could he commit ? All thanks to the English who bore patiently such gross acts on the 
part of the Nabob as taking medicinal drugs in the mornings, and desisted from dethroning 
him! But the patience of the English could endure no more ! For, one day the Nawab was 
present when some stallions were let on the mares for breeding purposes. 
It is a wonder that malicious as the English historians were, trying hard to noise far and wife 
the incapacity of the Nabob for good administration, by such silly, trifling accusations, they 
should have taken the trouble to come to Hindusthan to witness such occurrences as these. 
Even in their own country, throughout the various royal palaces, they could have gathered 
enough material of worst nature; and in that case, their time would certainly have been more 
profitably employed in annexing and confiscating the estates of their own princes and lords, 
in order to put an end to violations and outrages of a far more nefarious kind! 
As soon as the British Resident received the order that the Nabob should be informed of the 
decision of Dalhousie – a lasting stain on his regime – the Resident went to the Nabob’s 
palace and began to insist that the Nabob should sign a document stating that he was perfectly 
willing to give over his dominions to the Company. The Nabob read the document and flatly 
refused to sign. To make the Nabob sign this document, the Resident began attempts to bribe 
the Ranee and the Vizier and the threat was also given that a refusal by the Nabob to sign the 
document would result in even his pension being stopped. The Nabob was overwhelmed with 
grief at this and began even to weep. But it was of no use. Seeing at the end of three days that 
the refusal was still persisted in, the British army, insolently setting aside the Nabob’s 
authority, entered Lucknow and took forcible possession of the whole Ryasat, including his 
palace. The Zenanas were looted, the Begums were insulted, the Nabob was hurled from the 
51 
throne, palaces were turned into stables for the soldiers of the English and thus began a happy 
beginning of the good administration of the so-far-badly-managed Kingdom of Oudh. 
Though the ruling prince of Oudh was a Mahomedan, most of the big land-owners under him 
were Hindus. Jahgirs and Talukdari rights had continued from father to son in the families of 
these Zemindars for generations. Hundreds of villages were administered under the single 
authority of each of these proprietors. They possessed forts and had small armies under them 
to protect these Jahgirs. No wonder, then, that these Zemindars very soon incurred the 
displeasure of the Company. With a view to reduce all to the same level of poverty, the 
sordid roller of the Company’s land revenue administration began to devastate the land. The 
Talukdars were deprived of their numerous villages wholesale, their lands were confiscated, 
their forts were demolished, and all over the land of Ayodhya one long wail of suffering rent 
the air ! The Amir of yesterday became a Fakir to-day. The descendants of ancient and noble 
families were driven from village to village at the behest of a raw white youth of yesterday; insults were everywhere given; whole families were reduced to dust.4 
The English claimed that they were doing these things for the poor agriculturists and 
villagers. Tyrannous land-owners oppressed the Ryot; hence, these protectors of the Ryot 
were introducing new methods to deliver the Ryot from the cruel grip of the landowner. How 
many Ryots and how many villagers were deceived by these false pretensions will soon be 
witnessed on the battle-fields of Ayodhya. Fahtiful villagers, attached to their masters, used 
to visit these homeless Zemindars and Taklukdars, robbed and driven from door to door, and 
used to pay them faithful homage in the profuse flow of sincere tears. Thus, there was terrible 
suffering – right from the Nabob of Oudh to the villagers; not a place but witnesses wholesale 
looting, even burning, misery, oppression, and tyranny, and did not hurl terrible curses and 
vowed vengeance; not a homestead but looked desolate, terribly desolate! Such was the 
beneficient administration that was substituted in Oudh for the misgovernment of the Nabob ! 
The world-wide difference between Swarajya and foreign rule was, thus, brought painfully to 
the notice of all Oudh. All their previous history stood before them vividly. They realised full 
well know that even death was preferable to living in slavery. How long to look on, while the 
Swadesh was reduced to dust and Swarajya was no more? They hated intensely these results 
and this shameful condition. 
52 
4. Kaye says with reference to the Zemindar :- The chances against him were many and great, 
for he had divers ordeals to pass through and he seldom survived them all. When the claims 
of a great Talukdar could not be altogether ignored, it was declared that he was a rogue or a 
fool.... They gave him a bad name and they straightway went to ruin him ..... It was at once a 
cruel wrong and a grave error to sweep it away as though it were an encumbrance and an 
usurpation. 
At this very time, the roller of the Inam Commission was working in other provinces in order 
to destroy the stamina of Zemindars and Vatandars in those provinces and reduce them to the 
level of those classes in Oudh. Those lands and those Jahgirs which had been won by the 
Sanad of the Sword were being abolished wholesale, because they could not show 
documentary evidence of Sanads of paper. That the work of the Inam Commission was 
terrible may, to some extent, be realised from this single fact that nearly 35000 big Jahgirs 
and extensive Inams were inquired into by the Inam Commission and of these, within the 
space of ten years, three-fifths were usurped! By this means, all over India, property of every 
kind was rendered insecure. Thrones of princes, Vatans of Sardars, lands of Zemindars, 
Talukas of Talukdars, houses of citizens, the lands dedicated to the temples, the fields of 
agriculturists – all these were, in this terrible conflagration, burned to ashes. Even life was 
rendered insecure. No one could be sure that the few morsels of food which he was allowed 
to-day would be spared to him to-morrow. The contrast between Swarajya and foreign 
government, independence and slavery, stood naked in all its horrible aspects before the 
people. 
Thus did the English Administrator benevolently in this extraordinary way these vast 
dominions of our Indian princes which had been so far badly administered ! 
53 
CHAPTER V ADING FUEL TO FIRE 
To allow the existance of a slavery under which such unjust acts of oppression (as have been 
mentioned in the last chapter) and hundreds of other unmentionable crimes (which have been 
left unmentioned, being, indeed, too numerous to mention) are committed and encouraged 
and to bow the head in submission to the perpetrators thereof, is not this the very destruction 
of Religion ? What religion is there which has not condemned dependence and slavery? The 
ultimate goal of true religion is likeness unto the nature of the Supreme Being that moves 
everything, of Him who made all beings capable of becoming all-perfect. There must not be 
imperfection in ma if he is to be like the All-Perfect. But how can there be anything but 
imperfection in a country where there is slavery ? God is the essence of justice, and slavery is 
absence of justice. God is the essence of freedom; slavery is absence of freedom. Hence, 
where there is God there cannot be slavery, and where there is slavery there cannot be God or 
Godliness. Where there is no place for God, there can be no religion. In short, true religion 
cannot exist where slavery, the nursery of injustice, is rampant. Slavery is the straight road to 
Hell and true religion is a means of attaining Heaven. To walk in the path leading towards 
Heaven, the shackles of slavery must be broken. This was the practical philosophy which Sri 
Samartha Ramdas gave to Shivaji and Sri Pran Nath taught Chhatrasala and this advice to 
win Swaraj for the sake of religion, by fighting and dying for it, began to echo in the hearts of 
the people trodden under slavery, in 1857, two hundred years after it was originally given. 
Those, who had thrust this slavery – unnatural, born of injustice, - on Hindusthan, had 
already begun the destruction of religion not only in India but all over the world. For, that 
religion is there which has not condemned injustice ? But not satisfied with the tacit insult of 
the religion of India from the very day he set foot on the Indian soil up to the terrible battles 
of 1857, the Feringhi has been making steady and unceasing attempts to trample the Hindu 
religion and the Moslem faith. The head of the whole English nation was turned at the 
54 
immeasurable success which had attended the attempt to Christianise (?) the indigenous 
ignorant races of Africa and America, and they had strong hopes that in India too, in a few 
days, the Cross would be everywhere triumphant. That the English fully believed that 
Hindusthanis would be ashamed of their religion when they saw the light of western 
civilisation and give it up, that they would consider the Bible more sacred than the Vedas and 
the Koran, and that they would be gathered together in the fold of the Church, leaving their 
Temples and Musjids, - is fully and unmistakably seen from the literature of that time and 
from the writings and speeches of Englishmen of the first half of the last century. The 
chairman of the Directors of the East India Company, Mr. Mangles, said in the House of 
Commons, in 1857 :- 
“Providence has entrusted the extensive empire of Hindusthan to England in order that the 
banner of Christ should wave triumphant from one end of India to the other. Everyone must 
exert all his strength that there may be no dilatoriness on any account in continuing in the 
country fire grand work of making all India Christian.” 
Macaulay, in 1936 – when schools in which English education was to be given were first 
opened in Bengal, had expressed a hope amounting almost to a conviction that, in thirty years, there would be no idol-worshipper left I Bengal.1 
The mind of the Feringhi was filed with such contempt and such hatred for the Hindu and 
Moslem faiths – the two principal religions of India – that very prominent writers, forgetting 
even ordinary conventionalities, constantly heaped shameful abuse on the two religions 
whenever they got a change. 
The constant insistence by the East Indian Company to make India Christian was due to a 
very obvious reason. Once the religions of India died, the national feeling of the people 
would also die; individuality would die and it is infinitely more easy to rule a nation whose 
individuality is dead than to rule one which has a clearly marked individuality. Thus, the 
question was one of diplomacy rather than of religion, and the reason why England did not 
lift the sword for the solution of the problem was also to be found in diplomacy. England had 
learnt many lessons from the history of Aurangzeb. Both the strength and weakness of the 
policy of that monarch had been carefully studied by the English. Learning the wisdom of 
Aurangzeb, that the destruction of the religion of a conquered race makes the problem of 
retaining it in perpetual slavery much easier, the English had avoided his folly of open 
55 
persecution for religion. Hence the stolid and continuous efforts of the English to make India 
Christian by indirect means only and not openly. 
1. “It is my firm belief that, if our plan of educatio is followed up, there would not be a single 
idolator in Bengal 30 years hence !” – Macaulay’s letter to his mother, Oct.12, 1836. 
Rev. Kennedy wrote at the time, “Whatever misfortunes come on us, as long as our Empire in 
India continues, so long as our Empire in India continues, so long let us not forget that our 
chief work is the propagation of Christianity in the land. Until Hindusthan, from Cape 
Comorin to the Himalayas, embraces the religion of Christ and until it condemns the Hindu 
and the Moslem religions, our efforts must continue persistently. For this work, we must 
make all the efforts we can and use all the power and all the authority in our hands; and 
continuous and unceasing efforts must be kept on until India becomes a magnificent nation, 
the bulwark of Christianity in the East! If, with such uninterrupted preseverance, we continue 
our efforts, then I do not doubt that by the grace of God, we shall be successful in the end!” 
No wonder, then, that every citizen of India – seeing that English authorities and missionaries 
were using such language openly – began to feel that, under the English Raj, everyone would 
eventually be forced to be Christian. With the disappearance of Swaraj, the Rajas and 
Maharajas who made rich gifts of Inams and Jahgirs to Temples and Musjids, were also 
disappearing. In this powerless state, - instead of new inams being granted, instead of fresh 
gifts of money being showered on Temples and Musjids as when where was Swaraj – even 
those Inams and the money remaining yet in their hands were being taken away forcibly from 
the temples and mosques. And there is no wonder that, seeing that there was no protection for 
their religions, the Hindus and the Moslems alike were pained and grieved. Nor is it to be 
wondered at that the blood of both the Hindus and the Mahomedans boiled with rage at being 
openly described in official and private documents as “heathens,” and peculiarly abusive 
epithet. And yet, there was every indication that the Feringhis, who cared more for the 
increase of commerce than of the Christian religion and were the devotees more of Mammon 
than of Christ – the Prince of Poverty, would therefore desist from attacking the religious 
prejudices of the people by open violence. 
As if with the express purpose of proving the falsity of such an idea, the English in the 
insolence born of unbridled power very soon began an open and violent interference with the 
religions of Hindusthan. Even while efforts were being made to pass in Calcutta the law for 
56 
the abolition of suttee, public opinion in India began to suspect deeper designs on the part of 
the Government. Even before this law for the abolition of suttee had passed through the 
Councils of Calcutta, the prisoners were prevented from observing their religions. A few days 
more saw the passing of the Widow Remarriage Act, in the face of the loud protests of the 
Hindus. No sooner had this law been passed than Lord Canning expressed his opinion that the 
law for the abolition of polygamy was to be brought into the Legislative Council, and he 
exerted himself to pass it as speedily as possible through the council. The question we have to 
answer here is not whether the law which the Company was going to introduce was good or 
bad. What we want, in this place, to say is that neither Hindus nor Mahomedans could be 
certain as to where the attack on their religious customs would stop, seeing that the English, 
in the exercise of their authority for the passing of these laws, had begun the dangerous habit 
of interfering by force with the religious customs of the people. These laws may be good or 
bad; nor may it be necessary to attach to them the slightest importance; but this much is clear 
that any changes in the social habits based upon religious texts can be brought about only by 
the authority of those religious and through their adherents. When a foreign administration 
professing an alien religion, after making promises never to interfere with the religious 
beliefs of the people, endeavours to change by force the hereditary customs, the established 
religious beliefs of the people, on the strength of a majority composed of men professing the 
foreign religion, in the council and on the strength of despotic authority, and that, when the 
public opinion clearly and unmistakably expressed, of the adherents of those religions was 
opposed to such change, while, in the Council, the men who belonged to these religions has 
no authority at all, - then, indeed there was not the least difference between the tyranny of 
Aurangzeb and the tyranny of the Company’s Raj. To-day law regarding only suttee has been 
passed; who could say that, when this injustice was swallowed by the people, what other laws 
the Company would not pass ? The English hated idolatry as much as they did suttee. To-day 
the law for the abolition of suttee was forced on the people against their will; who knows that, 
to-morrow, a law for the prevention of idol-worship would not be thrust on the people under 
the pretext of reform ? One injustice begets another. To allow the continuance of this system 
of interfering with religion by means of laws made by aliens was to follow the lifting of the 
sword of Aurangzeb. And when the English had begun to take up the role of Aurangzeb, 
there was no other remedy than that India must produce a Shivaji or a Guru Govind. And 
such was the usual impression all over India. 
And this idea the Christian missionaries began to strengthen themselves. In their street 
preachings at various places, they used to say openly that India would soon be Christainised. 
57 
The Sirkar had already begun to pass one law after another to destroy the foundations of the 
Hindu and Mahomedan religions. Railways had already been constructed, and carriages had 
been built in such a way as to offend the caste prejudices of the Hindus. The larger mission 
schools were being helped with huge grants from the Sirkar. Lord Canning himself 
distributed thousands of Rupees to every mission, and from this fact it is clear that the wish 
was strong in the heart of Lord Canning that all India should be Christian. Why, if the would- 
be converts and afraid that they would lose their property by conversion, a law shall be at 
once be passed to prevent this ! 
Hardly had the missionaries exhausted their sermons and lectures, when news came that a 
law had been passed that all the rights and privileges of converts to the property of their 
unconverted relatives should remain intact even after conversion. Another fact also came to 
light, that huge salaries were to be paid to the bishops and even archbishops from the Indian 
treasury. The insistence of every Englishman, from the highest officer in the Government to 
the commonest missionary of the towns, had reached such a pitch that the white superior in 
Government offices began to insist on all the “black” clerks under him to become Christian ! 
While the officers were ready to lay the axe at the root of India’s religions, at the expense of 
India’s money, themselves living on the fat of India – the Government did not move at all in 
the matter. For, what was the Government but Lord Canning and his councillors ? And, this 
Canning and this Council had surpassed all other officers in their holy zeal for conversion 
and were feeding the missionaries with lakhs of Rupees – those missionaries who defiled the 
people and heaped unrestrained abuse on their sacred religions. Under such circumstances, 
the people were reasonably afraid that a greater danger was in store for their religion under 
the British Raj. The English missionaries tried to allay the terrible unrest by an attempt to 
christianise the sepoys, the chief strength of the people of India, believing that the 
disaffection of the ordinary people would be no danger to them at all. That the low cunning of 
this trick was plainly understood by the people will be seen unmistakably from the 
proclamations of the “Multineers”. That the complaints and grievances mentioned in these 
proclamations are literally true can be collected even from the reluctant confessions of the 
English historians themselves. Except in the time of actual warfare, all days were days of 
leisure to the Sepoys. How were these days of leisure utilised by colonels and captains and 
other officers in the English army ? Why, in cosistantly poisoning the ears of the Sepoys with 
talks on Christianity! Do you think even this preaching was conducted in simple and 
decorous language? Not at all. Abuse, unrestrained filthy abuse, was heaped on the name of 
Rama Chandra, the sacred name, the mere mention of which makes the heart of every Hindu 
58 
fill with love and with devotion, and on the name of Mahomed, the very mention of whose 
name fills all Moslems with reverence and awe. The Koran and the Vedas were openly 
defiled and images were desecrated! If any Sepoy retaliated on these fiendish Feringhis and 
returned abuse for abuse, the poor Sepoy’s roti and ghee would be taken away by the 
authority of the missionary colonels. Why, very soon things came to such a pass that living in 
the English barracks meant the sacrifice of one’s religion. For, if any Sepoy accepted the 
Christian religion he was praised loudly and treated honourably; and this Sepoy was 
promoted in the ranks and his salary increased, in the face of the superior merits of the other 
Sepoys ! A soldier renegade giving up his religion became a Hawaldar and a Hawaldar, untrue to his religion, was promoted to be a Subahdar Major! 2 Seeing that the Sepoys in the 
army were poor, ignorant, and short-sighted; feeling that when the military was christianised, 
the christianising of the people was once a question of time; considering the question every 
way, the English had come to the conclusion that the chief attack must be delivered on the 
Sepoy in the army. And in accordance with this opinion, from many directions, secret and 
open attacks on the Hindu and Moslem faiths had already begun to be delivered. Not only 
that, but some commanders and colonels did not hesitate even to declare publicly, through 
newspapers, that they had entered the army with the express purpose and object of destroying 
the religion of the Sepoy. The Commander of the Bengal Infantry himself writes in the 
Government Report that he had been continuing uninterruptedly for 28 years the policy of 
christianising the military and that it was a part of military duty to save the souls of heathens 
from Satan! Who could dare to say that the fears of the Sepoy were unreasonable as to the 
impossibility of preserving their religion in the face of the attempts to undermine it, 
continued day and night by these padre heroes who stumped the country with port-folios of 
military orders on the one hand, and the Bible in the other ? Everywhere there was a strong 
conviction that the Government had determined to destroy the religions of the country and 
make Christianity the paramount religion of the land. 
An Englishman, to show how the hatred of the Feringhi was raging tumultuously in the hearts 
of both Hindus and Mahomedans, says :- “A Moulvie of my acquaintance, living outwardly 
on terms of intimacy with me, was on his death-bed. I was with him at the time and I asked 
him what was his last wish before he died. He looked very disconsolate and gloomy at this 
question. On being asked why he looked so gloomy, he said, ‘Truly, I assure you that I repent 
exceedingly that I did not kill even two Feringhis in my life!’ On another occasion a 
resectable and learned Hindu said boldly, ‘We wish you to be gone and our native rule to be 
established, that we may continue in the ways of our fathers!’ ”3 
59 
While this tumult of disaffection was raging everywhere Dalhousie himself made a further 
attack on the Hindu religion. Even English historians who consider it their duty to support all 
2. Causes of the Mutiny by a Bengali Hindu. 
3. Rev.Kennedy,M.A. 
the actions of the Government find it impossible to support this enormity. When the civilised 
Christian hero, Dalhousie, came forward to trample under foot the noble custom of adoption, 
one of the tenderest, most noble, loving, and sacred commandments of the Hindu Dharma 
Shastras and endeared to the people of all ages all over India, all India from one end to the 
other was shocked. The magazine required only a lighted match to explode with violence and 
this act of Dalhousie supplied it. 
To add fuel to this raging fire, orders were issued to the Indian sepoys that they should use 
the new cartridges ! Soon after the promulgation of the order for using new cartridges for the 
new rifles, factories were opened for the manufacture of these cartridges in various places. A 
certain kind of fat had to be used for the greasing of these cartridges so that they might be 
smooth and well-lubricated, and orders soon followed that the sepoys should bite off this 
greasy portion with their teeth instead of tearing it away with hands as formerly. Immediately 
afterwards schools were even opened that the sepoys might learn how to use these rifles and 
also how to bite the cartridges with their teeth, and the Government reports from various 
quarters stated that the sepoys were immensely pleased with the long range of these new 
rifles. 
One day, a Brahmin Sepoy belonging to the village of Dum-Dum, very near Calcutta, was 
going to the military barracks with his Lota full of water. At that instant, a scavenger came 
and asked to drink from the Lota. The Brahmin replied that his Lota would be rendered 
unclean by his touch. The scavenger replied, “Enough of caste pride now ! Do you not know 
that soon you would bite with your teeth the flesh of the cow and the fat of the pig ? The new 
cartridges are being expressly greased with these materials for this purpose! “ when he heard 
this, the Brahmin ran wild with excitement towards the camp, as if the very devil was in him; 
and in a few minutes, the sepoys became excites – a crown of mad men! – and horrible 
whisperings were in the air. Suspicions arose that the Feringhis had arranged a cunning plot 
to defile their religions by greasing the cartridges with cows’ blood and pigs’ fat. The Sirkar 
60 replied that, far from such a plot being devised by them, the very story that the cartridges 
were greased with cows’ blood and pigs’ fat was absolutely without foundation! 
Who was it then that spoke the lie ? Was it the Sirkar or the sepoys ? If the cartridges were 
really greased with cows’ blood and pigs’ fat, was it the result of mere ignorance or of 
conscious purpose on the part of the Government? That the English did not know with what 
material the cartridges were greased cannot be held for a moment. For in 1853, when these 
cartridges were introduced for the first time and when “native” sepoys from Cawnpore, 
Rangoon, Fort William and other places, not suspecting that unclean things had been used in 
their manufacture, has bitten off these cartridges with full confidence in their superiors, even 
then the English authorities knew with what the cartridges were greased. In December 1853, Col.Tucker has mentioned this fact very clearly in the Government reports.4 Why, even the 
Commander-in-Chief knew the fact and, in spite of this, the very things prohibited by the two 
religions were used and even factories for their manufacture were opened right in India! After 
ascertaining well this fact from the low caste Indians working in those factories, the sepoys of 
Barrackpore spread this news all over India. Even lightning travels not so quick! Within a 
fortnight, not a Hindu or a Mahomedan but was talking of cartridges and nothing but 
cartridges, wherever he was. And the stronger this public indignation grew, the stronger and 
more frequent grew the assertions on the part of the authorities, from the Governor-General 
down to the lowest white soldier, that the story of the cartridges was a mere fabrication. 
These statements of the Feringhi Government were not only absolutely false, but they were 
put forward deliberately with the knowledge that they were false. The fact that the very 
Commander-in-Chief was aware of four years before, was now being openly denied by the 
Government. That in the factory at Dum-Dum cartridges were not greased with cows’ and 
pigs’ fat, that the ignorant and superstitious sepoys had started this wholly unfounded 
rumour- such were the assertions of the English historians until a very recent date. But now, 
there does not seem to be the slightest doubt that the Government was well aware of this fact. 
The contractor who had undertaken to supply the fat for the cartridges had, in clear words, 
made a distinct agreement in his contract deed, drawn at that very time, to supply cows’ fat. 
The agreement was that the cartridges should be greased with the fat of the cow, the Sacred 
Mother, buying the same at the rate of two pence (two annas) per pound. And the sepoys 
should bite these cartridges with their teeth! When this cunning scheme was exposed, the 
Feringhi Government immediately issued orders that, thereafter, whatever fat was to be used 
for the cartridges should be only from sheep or goats, and that cows’ and pigs’ fat should 
61 
never be used. If these orders mean anything they mean that so far the cartridges were being 
greased with cows’ and pigs’ fat. It was necessary for them to issue this new regulation 
because they knew this fact. From the Government documents published by Forrest it is clear 
beyond a doubt that, in the fat used for the cartridges, cows’ and pigs’ fat was mixed, and that 
3. Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p.380 
this fact was known to the highest English authorities in the land.5 And when the sepoys 
refused to bite these cartridges, the Feringhi military authorities used to swear that this was 
altogether false. Not only that, but they were threatened with severe punishment if they 
refused to obey the military orders through their silly prejudices. But when, regardless of 
these threats, it appeared that the sepoys were going to dare everything for the protection of 
their Dharma, then the Sirkar quietly retreated back and yielded on one point, allowing the 
sepoys to use a certain paper instead of fat. But what guarantee was there that a Government 
which could stoop to the meanness of using pigs’ and cows’ fat would not use some other 
mean trick of the same nature to make the paper substituted for the lubricating mixture 
smooth? If once unconsciously they were defiled with cows’ and pigs’ meat thrust in their 
mouths, then the missionary colonels and padre commanders would say, “Look here, you 
have now been christianised!” If, on the one hand, the military superiors tried to soothe the 
indignation and anger of the sepoys by false denials and lowly retractations, on the other 
hand, they provoked them still more by distributing on the parades thousands of big 
pamphlets full of abuse of Rama and Mahomed to spite their religions. The beginning of the 
agitation against the cartridges was started early in January and, before the month had ended, 
the Government had to yield on yet another point – a fresh regulation allowed the soldiers to 
use the fat they themselves prepared. Further, Birch, at the same time, by means of another 
Government memorandum, assured all the sepoys that not a single objectionable cartridge 
had been sent into the army! The Prince of Lies could not have been more versatile! Twenty- 
two thousand and five-hundred cartridges from the Umballa depot alone and fourteen 
thousand from the Sialkot depot had been already sent in 1856! In the rifle classes in various 
places, even at that very moment, practice in the use of these cartridges was being given! In 
the Gurkha Regiments, the cartridges were being openly introduced! And military authorities 
used to threaten the sepoys that they would be physically forced to use the cartridges. Why, in 
one or two places, when the sepoys were obstinate in their refusal to use these cartridges, 
whole regiments were punished severely. 
62 
5. Says Yake : “There is no question that beef fat was used in the composition of this 
tallow.” (Vol.I,p.381). Says Lord Roberts: “The recent researches of Mr.Forrest in the records 
of the Government of India prove that the lubricating mixture used in preparing the cartridges 
was actually composed of the objectionable ingredients, cows’ fat and lard and the incredible 
disregard of the soldiers’ religious prejudices was displayed in the manufacture of these 
cartridges.” - Forty Years in India, p.431. 
So, the sepoys determined that, whether they had to use these cartridges or not, they would 
not rest quiet until they had destroyed this political slavery and this dependence which was at 
the root of all this trouble. What religion can a slave have? The first step towards Dharma is 
to be a free man of a free country. 
Rise, then, O Hindusthan, rise! Even as Shri Ramdas exhorted “Die for Dharma; while dying, 
kill all your enemies and win back Swarajya; while killing, kill well.” Murmuring such 
sentiments to himself, every sepoy in India began to sharpen his sword for the fight for 
Sradharma and Swarajya! 
63 
CHAPTER VI LIT UP 
THE SACRIFICIAL FIRE 
It is then inevitable that we must resist sword in hand and wage a relentless struggle to win 
back our political independence and to safeguard the honour of the ashes of our fathers and 
the temples of our gods. We must hence hasten first to propitiate the God of War, the Lord of 
Hosts, even as Indrajit did before he marched on to the battlefield, as the ‘Puranas’ tell us, to 
secure the unconquerable Chariot which he expected to appear forth out of the blazing 
Sacrificial Fire. True it is that Indrajit was foiled in his attempt to secure it b ecause 
unrighteous was his cause. But our cause is just, is righteous! We need not fear frustration. 
Even though we know that to fight for what we call Right does not unfailingly win though its 
inherent justificability or righteousness unless and until it is upheld by proportionate Might, 
even then to fight for our Right to the best of our might is in itself a heroic joy which fills the 
warrior with a divine intoxication. 
Lit up the Sacrificial Fire then, for we must propitiate the Lord of Hosts, the God for War! 
Dig the Sacrificial Fire-pit on the altar wider and wider, deeper and deeper! Well and good: 
Lo! The Fire of National Indignation is already bursting forth into flames! As the first 
sacramental rite, the Sankalpa, the declamatory vow, has already been proclaimed a hundred 
years ago as earli as the year 1757 A.D. So, as the first sacrificial offering, throw the Field of 
Plassey into the flaming pit! 
Where is the Kohinoor of the Panjab? Here has Dalhousie himself offered to help us and 
brought it, snatching it away from its rightful owner the Khalsa of Guru Govindsingh! What 
sacrificial offering can be more igniting the hungry Fire than the Gem of “the purest ray 
64 
serene”, this ancient historical emblem of IndianSovereignty? Throw then, the Kohinoor of 
Punjab in. 
The next immediate offering must be Burma. So let its King Theeba be exiled and into this 
crackling Fire pit, throw in the kingdom of Burma too. 
How do you forget the Throne of Shivaji himself? What is the good of its keeping rotting at 
Satara? We must respect the right of precedence due to it! Help us Oh, obliging Britania by 
doing your worst with your ravenous claws and relegating the kings there to the graves – 
where they might yet rule freely – bring here the Maratha throne quick! That the Fire of 
National indignation may get more and more fed, fat ad fierce, throw the throne of Satara in! 
The Gadi of Nagpur by itself could be but a poor offering for such a wild, warlike God. 
Hence bring ye, with the Gadi all the empty palaces, elephants, horses and the very anees too, 
not only with their jewels, rudely robbed but with their shrieks and weepings and wailings 
and in this Sacrificial Blazing pit throw it all altogether! 
Even though the flames are rising like huge columns leaping forth into the skies higher and 
higher yet they must be lit still more intensely and fiercely. So throw the lightning of Zansi 
in! Ah! Hear you not now the rambling so deep, so roaring in the bowels of this blazing fire pit, 
this ‘Yadnya-Kund’? Surely some great explosive Revolutionary Birth is getting into line, 
form and figure! Feed up, Feed up the mighty sacrificial fire with anything and everything 
that is intensely combustible and at hand. So throw the Nabob of Oudh in! In with the Gadi of 
Tanjore! In witrh the Nabob of Arcot! Push in Raj Anguli, Sambalpur, all the Talukdars, 
Jahagirdars, Inamdars, Vatandars in fact all those who can affix a ‘Dar’ to their titles, 
depriving them of all their proprietary rights and possessions and making them all ‘Nadars’ -- 
throw in, throw in! 
And now has come to the time for Dum Dum! Hasten ye all, friends and foes, and bring all 
the new cartridges in millions from the Dum Dum type factories spread throughout India, dip 
them in cow’s blood, boil them in pig’s fat and throw them into this all absorbing, all 
consuming Jaw of Fire! There, from the white-heat point the wild fire has risen to War-heat! 
65 
Dancing on the b lazing flames out of the Sacrificial fire pit, Behold, arises at last the 
presiding Deity, terrible to look at! Salutes innumerable to Thee, O Ward God, O Lord of 
Hosts! Under whose fierce insolence tyranny and injustice are ground and burnt to ashes, by 
the mighty hammer in whose hands the shackles of slavery get knocked down to pieces and 
Nations are set free and whose hundred and one red hot tongues are lolling out from hundred 
and one mouths athrist to lick up battlefulls of blood when loaded war clouds burst out on 
Nations fighting for life, for death, - that aspect of Thee, O spirit of War, O Har- the terrible! 
We contemplate, we worship! Be propitious! Wilt thou, O Lord, sharpen the edge of our 
sword and bless it with Victory? 
“If not, perchance, with victory – with Vengeance will I bless your sword !! – yes vengeance, 
the force deterent, the Nemesis which tyranny dreads like death and which holds in the 
hollow of its hands the deeds of a Victory to come !!” 
66 
CHAPTER VII SECRET ORGANISATION 
WHILE the forces of the Revolution were thus maturing themselves all over India, as 
described in the last chapter, in Brahmavarta a Programme was being prepared as to how to 
organise properly all the materials for the war so as to bring the War of Independence to a 
successful conclusion. 
In the third chapter, we left Rango Bapuji and Azimullah Khan holding secret interviews with 
each other in some London rooms. Though history cannot record the exact conversation the 
Brahmin of Satara held with the Khan Sahib of Brahmavarta, still, it is as certain as anything 
can be that the map of the rising was being prepared by these two in London. After leaving 
London, Rango Bapuji went straight to Satara, but it was not possible for Azimullah Khan to 
go direct to Hindusthan. The extent of the domonions and the diplomacy of those against 
whom the war was to be wages were not now confined to Hindusthan alone. Hence, it was 
necessary to attach the British Empire in as many placed as possible. It was also essential that 
it should be ascertained from what quarters in Europe direct help or moral sympathy could be 
expected in the coming War of Independence. With this object, Azimullah Khan made a tour 
in Europe before returning to India. He want to the capital of the Sultan of Turkey famed 
throughout the world as the Khalifa of all Moslems. Being informed that, in the Russo- 
Turkish War then going on, the English had been defeated in the important battle of 
Sebastopol, he stayed some time in Russia. Many English historians have a suspicion that 
Azimullah had gone there to ascertain whether Russia would pursue the war against England 
in Asia, and, if possible, to enter into an offensive and defensive treaty. When the trumpet of 
National War had been blown, all people openly declared that the Nana had completed a 
treaty with the Tsar of Russia and the Russian army was ready to fight against the Feringhis. 
If we bear this in mind, the above suspicion is strengthened. When Azimullah was in Russia, 
he had an interview with the well-known writer Russel, the military correspondent of the 
67 
London Times. The poor man could not have even dreamt that, immediately after the Turko- 
Russian War, he would have to send from Hindusthan news of the wonderful activities of his 
guest. As soon as Azimullah heard the news of the defeat of the English, and that the 
Russians had beaten back the attach of the united forces of the English and the French on the 18th of June, he obtained admittance into the English camp. His dress was Hindusthani and 
rich like that of a prince. As soon as Russell came out, Azimullah said to him. "I want to see 
this famous city and those great Rustoms, the Russians, who have beaten the French and the English together.”1 Undoubtedly, Azimullah was a past master in irony and satire. This 
curiosity on the part of Azimullah to see these brave Rustoms who defeated both the English 
and the French Russell undertook to satisfy, by inviting him to his tent. On that day, till the 
shades of sunset closed round them completely, “he was looking with marked interest at the 
fire of the Russian guns.” One cannon-ball of the Russian guns burst right at his feet, but he 
did not move. The gay Azimullah, before returning home in the evening, said to Russell, “I 
have my serious doubts whether you could ever capture this strong fortified position.” That 
night, Azim slept in Russell’s tent, and he left next day, early in the morning. On the table 
was left this note :- “Azimullah Khan presents his compliments to Russell, Esq., and begs to 
thank him most truly for his kind attentions.” 
Is is difficult to say where Azimullah went after leaving Russia. Yet, from the mention in the 
Proclamation of Cawnpore later on, it would appear as certain he was trying to put through some diplomatic scheme in Egypt also.2 
So, Azimullah then completed his European tour and returned to Brahmavarta. As soon as 
Azim reached Brahmavarta, the whole political atmosphere of the palace was changed. The 
Jaripatka which had waves triumphant and victorious all over India lay so long in dust in the 
1. The above account is published in Russell”s Diary, a very well-known book. 
Russell was military correspondent of the London “Times” in the war of 1857. He was 
personally present in most of the affairs that he describes. 
2. Lord Roberts has come across a genuine letter from Azimullah to the Sultan of 
Turkey about the oppression in Hindusthan. He says regarding this “There were numerous 
letters from his English fiancees and two from a Frenchman .... It seems probable that ‘les 
principales choses’ to which Lafont hopes to bring satisfactory answers were invitations to 
68 
the disaffected and disloyal in Calcutta and, perhaps, the French settlers in Chandernagore to 
assist in the effort about to be made to throw off the British yoke. A portion of the 
correspondence was unopened and there were several letters in Azimullah’s own 
handwriting. Two of these were to Omar Pasha of Constantinople and told of the Sepoy’s 
discontent and the troubles state of India generally.” – Forty Years in India, p. 429. 
palace; the glorious drum of the Peshwas at the beating of which thousands of Mahratta 
swords had advanced on the battlefields and performed such deeds of wondrous valour, that 
drum hitherto only sounded melancholy to the ear; and the royal signet of the Peshwas on the 
sealing of which had depended the fate of the Mogul Empire had so far been lying sealing its 
own windowhood in the palace. But now all these appeared to be thrilled with extraordinary 
life. The dust-soiled Jaripatka shone forth again; the old drums which had almost forgotten 
their martial music were practising again the forgotten military airs; and the regal seals 
seemed to be eager, extremely eager. The eyes of Shrimant Nana Sahib, “excited like those of 
a tiger, brilliant and fierce,” since the arrival of Azimullah Khan, flashed more fierce from 
injured pride and shone more brilliant as he drank inspiration from the words of Shri Krishna, 
“Therefore, get ready for battle.” Every corner of Brahmavarta echoed with those eternal 
words, Tasmat yuddhaya yujyaswa. For, in Swadesh, even in their own Hindusthan, the 
people have been reduced to be slaves and have foreign masters : the Swaraj is no more, they 
have lost their natural rights of liberty! All the attempts to win back the country and its 
independence by conciliation and by money, and by appeal, had so far failed; hence, be ready 
for war. “If you are killed, you will get to heaven; if you win, you will enjoy the earth; so, be 
ready for war; you will not be committing any sin thereby” – it was such heavenly inspiration that gave to Nana’s eyes extraordinary brilliance!3 He studied the conditions of his country, 
saw the sufferings of his countrymen, noticed the destruction of his religion and, diagnosing 
all these chronic symptoms, he came to the conclusion that nothing but the sword could cure 
that terrible disease of slavery. Though it is not clear what was the ultimate ideal which he set 
before himself, still, it would appear that, in his opinion, the first thing to do was to drive the 
English out by unsheathing the sword and thus get independence; and then, to set up an 
Indian Government under the banner of the united authority of all the Indian princes. Before 
his eyes rose clear the history of how Swadesh fell into slavery through the turmoil of 
internecine quarrels. Before him, on one side was the portrait of Shivaji Maharaj, on the other 
of Baji Rao, his father. By seeing these two pictures side by side, he could well contrast the 
past glory and the present shame! And, hence, Nana’s programme was first to fight a united 
69 
3. “Nana’s object, then, was to lay the foundation of his future sovereignty at 
Cawnpore. The mighty power exercised by the Peshwas was to be restored; and to himself, 
thearchitect of his own fortunes, would belong the glory of replacing that vanished sceptre. 
There can be no doubt that some such thoughts influenced him.” – Trevelyan: p. 133. 
fight, to make India free and, by removing internecine warfare, to establish the rule of the 
United State of India which would, thus, take its rightful place in the council of the free 
nations of the earth. 
He, also, felt that the meaning of “Hindusthan” was thereafter the united nation of the 
adherents of Islam as well as Hinduism. As long as the Mahomedans lived in India in the 
capacity of the alien rulers, so long, to be willing to live with them like brothers was to 
acknowledge national weakness. Hence, it was, up to then, necessary for the Hindus to 
consider the Mahomedans as foreigners. And moreover this rulership of the Mahomedans, 
Guru Govind in the Panjab, Rana Pratap in Rajputana, Chhatrasal in Bundelkhand, and the 
Maharattas by even sitting upon the throne at Delhi, had destroyed; and, after a struggle of 
centuries, Hindu sovereignty had defeated the rulership of the Mahomedans and had come to 
its own all over India. It was no national shame to join hands with Mahomedans then, but it 
would, on the contrary, be an act of generosity. So, now, the original antagonism between the 
Hindus and the Mahomedans might be consigned to the Past. Their present relation was one 
not of rulers and ruled, foreigner and native, but simply that of brothers with the one 
difference between them of religion alone. For, they were both children of the soil of 
Hindusthan. Their names were different, but they were all children of the same Mother; India 
therefore being the common mother of these two, they were brothers by blood. Nana Sahib, 
Bahadur Shah of Delhi, Moulvi Ahmad Shah, Khan Bahadur Khan, and other leaders of 1857 
felt this relationship to some extent and, so, gathered round the flag of Swadesh leaving aside 
their enmity, now so unreasonable and stupid. In short, the broad feature of the policy of 
Nana Sahib and Azimullah were that the Hindus and the Mahomedans should unite and fight 
shoulder to shoulder for the independence of their country and that, when freedom was 
gained, the United States of India should be formed under the Indian rulers and princes. 
How to achieve this ideal was the one all-absorbing thought of everyone in the place of 
Brahmavarta. Two things were necessary for the success of this terrible war that was to be 
70 waged to win back freedom. The first thing was to create a passionate desire in Hindusthan 
for this ideal; the second was to make all the country rise simultaneously for the purpose of 
achieving it. To turn India’s mind into the channels of freedom and to guide India’s hand to 
strike for freedom, these two things it was necessary to accomplish; and this in such a manner 
that the Company’s government should not suspect anything while the scheme was yet 
unripe. Not forgetting historical experience but guided by it, a secret organisation was 
resolved upon and, at once, started at Brahmavarta. 
To obtain all information, about this secret society, either now or in the immediate future, is 
as difficult as it is to obtain the information about any other secret society. But upon the facts that occasionally come to light, one cannot but admire the skill of the organisers.4 
A little before 1856, Nana began to send missionaries all over India to initiate people into this 
political ideal. In addition to sending missionaries to awaken the people, Nana also sent tried 
and able men to the different princes from Delhi to Mysore, to fill their minds with the 
glorious ideal of the United States of India and to induce them to join in the Revolution. 
These letters which were sent into every Durbar secretly, clearly pointed out how the English 
were playing the game of reducing India to insignificance by annexing Swadeshi kingdoms 
under the pretext of “no heir”, how those states which were spared yet would soon be reduced 
to the same fate as the others and how, under the yoke of slavery, country and religion were 
both being tramples under foot; and they concluded by exhorting the princes to work for the 
Revolution which was to make them free. Direct evidence is available that messengers and 
letters from Nana were sent to the states of Kolhapur and Patwardhan, to the Kings in Oudh, 
the princes of Bundelkhand, and others. The English arrested one of such messengers at the 
Durbar of Mysore. The evidence given by this man is so important that we give it word for 
word below :- “Two or three months before Oudh was annexed, Shrimant Nana Sahib had 
begun sending letters. First, no one would reply, for no one hoped for any success. After 
Oudh was annexed, however, nana began a regular battery of letters and, then, the opinions of 
Nana began to appeal to the Sirkars of Lucknow. Raja Man Singh, the leader of the 
Purbhayas, was also won over. Then the Sepoys began to organise amongst themselves and 
the Sirkars of Lucknow began to help them. No replies to letters were received till Oudh was 
annexed; but as soon as that was accomplished, hundreds of people came forward boldly and 
71 
4. Trevelyan says in reference to this : “No society of rich and civilised Christians 
who ever undertook to preach the gospel of peace and goodwill can have employed a more 
perfect system of organisation than was adopted by these rascals whose mission it was to 
preach the gospel of sedition and slaughter.” – Cawnpore, p.39. 
replied confidentially to Nana. Next came the affair of the cartridges and, then, the 
disaffection was so great that letters were simply showered on Nana”.5 This very agent has 
given a long list of the letters sent by Nana to the various Durbars. 
While agents of Nana were moving from one Durbar to another from Delhi to Mysore in 
order to draw them into the War of Independence, it was in the Dewan-I-Khas of Delhi, more 
than in any other Durbar, the seeds of Revolution began to take root. The English had not 
stopped at merely taking away the Padshahi of the Padshah of Delhi, but had recently 
decided even to take away the title of Padshah from the descendants of Babar. The Emperor, 
though reduced to such an extremity, and Zinat Mahal, the beloved, clever, and determined 
Begum of the Emperor, had already decided that this last opportunity of regaining the lost 
glory should not be allowed to go by, and, if dying was the only resource, then, they should 
die the death which would only befit an Emperor and an Empress. At this juncture, the 
English were engaged in a war with Persia. Seeing that a simultaneous rising in India would 
be a help, the Shah of Persia began to open diplomatic correspondence with the Emperor of 
Delhi. In the Declaration of the Emperor of Delhi, it had been made quite clear that a 
confidential agent had been sent to Persia from the Delhi Durbar. While this intrigue was 
going on at the Durbar of the Shah, right in the city of Delhi agitation was started to stir the 
public feeling to its very depths. For this work, even public Proclamations were sometimes 
posted up on the wells of the town. In the beginning of 1857, a Proclamation couched in the 
following terms appeared boldly : “The army of Persia is going to free India from the hands 
of the Feringhis. So, young and old, big and small, literate and illiterate, civil and military, all 
5. “ For months, for years indeed, they had been spreading their network of intrigues 
all over the country. From one native court to another, from one extremity to another of the 
great continent of India, the agents of the Nana Sahib had passed with overtures and 
invitations discreetly, perhaps mysteriously, worded to princes and chief of different races 
and religions, but most hopefully of all to the Mahrattas .... There is nothing in my mind 
72 
more substantiated than the complicity of Nana Sahib in widespread intrigues before the 
outbreak of the Mutiny. The concurrent testimony of witnesses examined in parts of the 
country widely distinct from each other takes this story altogether out of the regions of the 
conjectural.” Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, pp.24-25. 
Hindusthanee brothers should leap forth into the field to free themselves from the Kaffirs.”6 
Though these Proclamations were ever and anon posted in public places, still the English 
could hardly trace the persons who posted these Proclamations; and Indian newspapers used 
to publish these Proclamations and to criticise them in mysterious language. The various 
Shahzadas and their retainers in the palaces of Delhi openly and secretly spread disaffection, 
and were engaged in weaving a net-work of conspiracies. In the grounds of Prince Nawab 
Bakht, for six years, Sergeant Fleming’s son had been practising riding. But when, in the 
beginning of April 1857, this English youth went to the residence of Vizier Mahbub Ali, the 
prince, excited beyond measure, said, “Away, get away from here, I boil with rage when I see the face of any Feringhi!” So saying, the Prince spat on him!7 Other people were working 
more secretly and quite differently from the manner of this abusive prince. Mrs. Aldwell says 
in her evidence, that she had personally heard Mahomedan mothers asking their children to pray that the English should be destroyed root and branch.8 Mukund Lal, Private Secretary of 
the Emperor of Delhi, says :- “Sitting at the doors of the royal palace, used to discuss the 
Revolution openly. The Sepoys would rebel soon; the army of Delhi would rise against the 
English; and then, all people, along with the army, would throw off the Feringhi yoke and 
enjoy Swaraj – such definite opinions were current. All people were inspired with the hope 
that, when once the Raj was won, all power and all authority would remain in their own 
hands.” Thus, the every cellar, in every house in Delhi, the disaffection only awaited for a 
spark which should explode everything up. 
Like the capital cities of Delhi and Brahmavarta, Lucknow also, the capital of Oudh, the last 
victim that had fallen a prey to the greed of Dalhousie, began to catch fire from the flames of 
the War of the Revolution. The Nabob of Lucknow and his Vizier were now residing near 
Calcutta. To all appearances, the Vizier of Lucknow looked as if he was wasting his time in 
luxury; as a matter of fact, however, Vizier Ali Nakkhi Khan was as much absorbed in his 
dangerous conspiracy near Calcutta as Nana Sahib himself was. One cannot help feeling 
wonderstruck at the schemes – secret, extensive, and daring – which Ali Nakkhi Khan was 
73 
6. Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.II, p.30. 
7. Military Narrative (p.374): “Jawan Bakht commenced abusing, declaring that the 
sight of the Kaffir Feringhi disturbed his serenity, spat in his fact, and desired him to leave.” 
8. Trial of the King of Delhi. 
weaving to seduce the Sepoys in Bengal and to prepare them to join him at the right moment 
already fixed upon. Confidential agents were sent by him, in the garb of Fakirs or Sanyasis, 
to preach ‘sedition’ to the Sepoys. He opened correspondence with the Indian officers in the 
army to make them understand fully what immense advantages Swaraj could confer as 
compared with the service of the Company. How the English had committed an unpardonable 
crime in annexing Oudh, how the royal family of the Nabob had been treated with insult, and 
how the very Queen and Begums were expelled with violence from the palace – pictures of 
such heart-rending tyranny were drawn with such pathos that the brave Sepoys began to weep 
profusely. And, then and there, the Sepoys would take the water of the Ganges in their hands, 
or would swear by the Koran, that they would live only to achieve the destruction of the 
English rule. When Subahdar Majors, Subahdars, and Jamadars and the bigger officers were 
all sworn in, the whole regiment was naturally bound over. The Vizier of Oudh, by the use of such tactics, won over the whole army in Bengal.9 In Fort William itself, in Calcutta, the 
Revolutionary agents of Ali Nakkhi Khan moved silently. 
After sending letters to the various Durbars from Brahmavarta, Nana exerted himself 
thoroughly to awaken all the latent power of the people. Wshen Brahmavarta, Delhi, 
Lucknow, Satara, and such other big and prominent princes figures conspicuously in the 
Revolutionary Organisation, how could this organisation suffer for want of money ? To 
preach to all those who were a power among the people, thousands of Fakirs, Pundits, and 
Sanyasis were sent out in an incredibly short time. It is not true to say that all these Fakirs 
were true Fakirs; for, some of the Fakirs and Sadhus lived with the grandeur of Amirs. 
Elephants were given them for travelling. Guards armed to the teeth travelled with them, and 
every stage on their way was a regular camp. Provided with such paraphernalia, they could 
9. Some of the letters of the Sepoys of Barrackpore fell into the hands of the 
Ednglish. Kaye adduces the following letters as evidence for the above. “The second 
grenadier said that the whole regiment is ready to join the Nabob of Oudh.” “Subahdars said 
that they would join the Nabob of Oudh.” Subahdar Madarkhan, Sirdar Khan, and Ram Shahi 
74 
Lal said, “that in treachery no one could come up to the level of the “Beti-choot” Feringhis. 
Though the Nabob of Oudh gave up his kingdom, he could not even get a pension.” Many 
other letters, like this, the English came across afterwards.—Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p. 
429. (These regiments consisted of the sepoys from Oudh, Agra, and were only stationed in 
Bengal.--- Author’s note). 
influence and impress the people better, and the Sirkar also had fewer reasons to suspect 
them. Influential and noble Moulvies were appointed to preach the political Jehad, and they 
were rewarded with thousands of Rupees. Through towns and villages, these Moulvies and 
Pundits, these Fakirs and these Sanyasis began to travel, from one end of the country to the 
other, preaching secretly the war for political independence. Just this start was wanted, for 
this same trick was begun independently by other groups of the Revolutionary Organisation. 
After these paid missionaries came volunteers. Begging from door to door, they began to 
sow, in all directions, the principles of independence, patriotism, and love of Dharma – for 
the awakening of strength among the people. This work of preparing for revolutionary rising 
was done so cautiously and secretly that not much inkling of what was going on could reach 
even such cunning people as the English, until the explosion actually took place. When such 
a Fakir or a Sanyasi went to a village, a strange agitation and an unrest began in that village, 
and of this the English were sometimes cognisant. Whisperings went on in bazaars; ‘sahibs’ 
were refused water by the Bhishtis,Ayahs left English homes without permission; Baberchis 
purposely stood before the Mem-Sahibs half-dressed; and Indian messanger boys walked insolently and slovenly before their “masters”, when sent out.10 These Fakirs and Pundits 
used to walk round and about the military cantonments more particularly. From Barrackpore 
to Meerut, Umballa and Peshawar, they started secret societies and, more than that, 
practically surrounded every military cantonment. The Hindu and Moslem Sepoys in the 
army being very devoted to their religious teachers, the Sirkar, though they might suspect 
them, could hardly proceed against them. For, they feared that the Sepoys would find in it 
another grievance against the Government. And, if the Sirkar did, by any chance, suspect 
them, these political Sanyasis sowed the seeds of the Revolutionary War in the very houses of 
the Sepoys in the neighbouring village. The authorities at Meerut were at last compelled to 
ask a Fakir, who was lodging near the Meerut military cantonment, to move away. As soon as 
this order came, like a simple, innocent man, this grand person left the camp on his elephant, 
only to go to a neighbouring village and establish himself securely in the houses of the 
Sepoys!11 That patriot Moulvie Ahmad Shah, whose sacred name has cast a halo round 
Hindusthan, whose glorious achievements we shall have to describe very soon, began 
75 
similarly to tour through the country preaching the Revolutionary War. At last, when he 
began to preach in Lucknow itself, to thousands and tens of thousands in open meetings, that 
10. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore. 
11. The Meerut Narrative. 
there was no other way of saving the country and the religion than by killing the English, he 
was arrested for sedition and sentenced to be hanged! 
It was the custom to have a Mullah and a Pundit in every regiment for religious purposes. 
Taking advantage of this, the Revolutionaries entered the service as regimental Mullas and 
Pundits at the falling of the night, used to preach Revolution to the Sepoys secretly. Thus, 
these political Sanyasis toured from village to village for two years preaching Revolution, 
and at last succeeded in sowing the seeds of the terrible war to come. 
While itinerant Sanyasis and itinerant preachers preached in the villages and the country, 
local preachers were being sent to the bigger towns. In all the important places of pilgrimage 
where thousands of people congregated, the ever-existing dumb dislike of the usurping 
Feringhi rule was intensified into active hatred by the Revolutionary preachers. The stir that 
was created at all the holy places on thebanks of the Ganges, how the Sankalpa (resolution) 
of Revolutionary War was made along with the usual Sankalpa for the bath - these and other 
facts will soon be narrated in the history of the rising of those places. The hatred of the 
Feringhis in those Kshetras (holy places) was so strong, that open prayers were started by the 
priests in the temples of Benares, on behalf of their own rulers belonging to their own 
religion.12 
In order to make clear to the common people, in simple and clear language, how Swadharma 
and Swatantrya – Religion and Independence - were being insulted, the all-comprehensive 
programme of the Revolutionary party had not left out of their consideration any of the 
festivals or the Tamashas in which people took interest and congregated in large numbers. 
The dolls in the doll-theatres began now to speak a strange language and to dance a 
dangerous dance; at police station, under the shades of trees in Dharmasalas, and at public 
squares, Powadas and Lawanis (ballads and epic lays) were sung with the gusto of a new 
mysterious interpretation. The fame goes and there is a strong conviction everywhere that the 
song of Allah-Udal, one of the most popular songs in Northern India, does at once rouse in 
76 
the hearers the martial craving for war. This heroic material song, sung with spiritby 
minstrels, would cause the arms of the hearers tingle and itch for battle, and their blood 
would begin to boil on listening to the exploits of their ancestors; then, the subject would 
12. Red Pamphled. 
suddenly be changed and before their eyes would be forced the image of their present 
helplessness. And the hearers would be roused to rise against the Feringhiand act in the 
present the heroism they admired in the past. Itinerant groups of Tamashgars, so innocent I 
themselves that the Government was not even cognisant of their existence, were used for the 
preaching of the Revolutionary War by these consummate Revolutionists. Starting from 
Calcutta, they went on to the Panjab and, in the nights, exhibited their peculiarly dangerous Tamasha to their fellow countrymen.13 
These Tamashgars could not preach Revolution to the women, and so it would appear that 
the leaders of the Revolution sent out quack doctors and their wives – female gipsies – 
amongst the people, to move them with a new life and revolutionary discontent. The trick of 
using gipsies for their purpose was excellent. These gypsies used to foretell the destruction of 
English, depict the evil machinations of the alien rule and prescribe revolution as the only 
remedy and spell that could and would get rid of this evil which had possessed their 
Motherland! The coming narrative will show what a terrible hatred of the English had grown 
amongst the women and how anxious they were to destroy this rule. Thus, the war was 
preached in temples and Tirthas, in Kshetras, Jatras, and in festivals, on the road and in the 
house, amongst the Sepoys and the citizens, in Natakas and in Tamashas, to men as well as to 
women. 
Everywhere was this hatred of slavery and the desire for Swaraj manifested. “My religion is 
tying, my country is dying: my people have been reduced to a condition worse than that of 
dogs!” – such were the fears that moved every heart; and an unconquerable desire arose in 
every heart, from prince to pauper, to make that country live and that people rise to the height 
of men. And the passionate conviction went forth that streams of blood were but a small price 
to achieve that independence; and that, therefore, “Din! Din!” and “Har! Har! Mahadev!” – 
the war cries of the Indians – must rend the air. 
77 
To instil into every heart the one great desire for indedpendence, and rouse it to action, there 
could be no more effective weapon than poetry. When the mass of the people are possessed 
by an idea which struggles for adequate expression, the poet, who realises the idea more 
intensely than the rest, gives it a beautiful expression, which at once touches their hearts and 
13. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore, Short Narratives. 
makes them love the idea still more. Hence the great part that national songs play in all 
revolutions. The national songs are an expression of the national sour under the sway of a 
strong ideal. They unite the hearts of the people with ease. When the soul of the land of 
Bharata was swayed by an intense passion for liberty, for the protection of Swadharma and 
the attainment of Swarajya, strange indeed would it have been if the heart of the nation did 
not burst into song. The principal court bard of the Emperor of Delhi had himself composed a 
national song which was to be sung by every throat in Hindusthan, and the Emperor of Delhi, 
in person, had ordered that this should be sung on all occasions of public ceremony. It 
described the heroic deeds of the past and painted a pathetic picture of the present fallen state. 
In that national song was echoed the cry of the nation that those persons, whose heads had 
been crowned but yesterday with imperially aggressive independence, should be reduced to 
the condition of slaves to-day, that their religion which yesterday was the state religion 
should to-day be unprotected, and that heads crowned recently with glory should, alas, be trampled to-day under the foot of the foreigner.14 
While the national song was educating the people about their past glory and their present fall, 
a prophecy, that emblazoned the star of future hope and encouraged all, was heard, in the 
land. Prophecies are the leaps of the mind into the future. As soon as the heart of India began 
to long for Swaraj, the prophecies too began to point to Swaraj. From the northern snows to 
the extreme south, young and old circulated the prophecy that, thousands of years ago, a holy, 
ancient sage had foretold that the Feringhi Raj would end exactly a hundred years from the 
date of its creation! Indian newspapers gave wide publicity to this prophecy and interpreted it to mean that the Company’s Raj would fall to pieces on the 23rd of June,1857. This one 
prophecy led to the performance of such wonders in Hindusthan that it may safely be asserted 
that, but for this prophecy, several portions of this history would have to be written in a 
different way altogether. The year 1857 was the centenary of the Battle of Plassey and the 
78 
14. A mandate had, of late, gone forth from the palace of Delhi enjoining the 
Mahomedans, at all their solemn gatherings, to recite a song of lamentation indited by the 
regal musician himself which described in touching strains the humiliation of their race and 
the degradation of their ancient faith, once triumphant from the northern snows to the 
southern straits but now trodden under the foot of the infidel and the alien.- Trevelayn’s 
Cawnpore. 
Company’s rule would end in that year – this idea created a strange hope and an 
extraordinary inspiration which moved every part of Hindusthan since the beginning of 1857. 
After a considerable heated discussion between various English historians as to who foretold 
this, it has at last been decided beyond doubt that it was the stratagem of the Hindus, since it was according to their almanacs that the 100th year of Plassey fell in the year 1857. By this 
national prophecy, the impression of which is indelibly indited on some of the most important 
pages of this history, an extraordinary wave of agitation came over the hearts of the yound 
and old, and every one began to be ready to turn the prophecy into an actual fact. 
The secret organisation of the Revolution, which was first started in Brahmavarta was now growing at a tremendous rate.15 By this time, nuclei had been established in various places in 
Northern India and regular communication had been established between them. Rango Bapuji 
was trying hard to create nuclei of this organisation in the Deccan. The palace at Brahmavarta 
was the focus of the activities at Cawnpore; the same function was performed for Delhi by 
the Dewan-I-Khas of that premier city. The great and saintly Ahmad Shah had woven fine 
and cleverly the webs of Jehad – the War of Independence – through every corner of 
Lucknow and Agra. Kumar Singh, the hero of Jagadishpur, had taken the leadership of his 
province and, in consultation with Nana, had been busy gathering materials for war. The 
seeds of the Jehad had taken such root in Patna that the whole city was a regular haunt of the 
Revolutionary party. Moulvies, Pundits, Zemindars, farmers, merchants, vakils, students, of 
all castes and creeds, were ready to give up their lives for the sake of Swadesh and 
Swadharma. A very prominent leader of this secret organisation was a book-seller ! Near 
Calcutta, the Nabob of Oudh and his Vizier, Ali Nakkhi Khan, had seduced all the Sepoys 
and were ready for the occasion. The Mahomedan population of Hyderabad began to call 
secret meetings. The coils of the Revolution began to wind themselves round the Durbar of 
Kolhapur. The states of Patwardhan, and the father-in-law of Nana, at Sangli, were ready to 
fight – with their followers – under the banner of the united nation, in the coming war. Why, 
79 
right of Madras, in the beginning of the year 1857, the following Proclamation began to 
appear from the walls of the city: “Countrymen and faithful adherents of your religion, rise, 
15. Malleson says at the end of his voluminous history : “Of this conspiracy, the 
Moulvi was undoubtedly a leater. It had its ramifications all over India – certainly at Agra 
where the Moulvi stayed sometime- and almost certainly at Delhi, at Meerut, at Patna, and at 
Calcutta where the ex-King of Oudh and a large following were residing.”-Vol.V, p.292. 
rise ye, one and all, to drive out the Feringhi Kaffirs! They have trampled under foot the very 
elements of justice, they have robbed us of Swaraj; determined are they to reduce to dust our 
country. There is only one remedy, now, to free India from the insufferable tyranny of the 
Kaffir Feringhis, and that remedy is to wage a bloody war. This is a Jehad for Independene! 
This is a religious war for justice! Those who fall in such battles will be their country’s 
shahids. Opened wide are the doors of Heaven for the shahids. But Hell is burning fierce to 
engulf those wretches, whose cowardly traitors, who turn away from this national duty! 
Countrymen, of these, which would ye have? Choose now, even now!” 
To link together the innumerable group of the various provinces which were workiong 
separately, men were employed to travel about secretly and letters were rarely used. If letters 
were used at all, they were written in a mysterious language, any mention of names being 
avoided. But when, after some time, the English persisted in opening any and every letter that 
appeared suspicious to them, the leaders, in order that their schemes should not come out and 
not even a trace should be known to others, began to carry on their correspondence in a kind 
of cipher; a sort of code was formed composed of dots and numbers, and this was used by them on all occasions!16 
While everywhere activity of this kind was going on, the blunder as to the cartridges, born of 
the criminal desire to spite the religious feelings of the Sepoys, was committed by the 
English. This filled the cup of their iniquity! Every soldier vied with every other to fire the 
first short. At the proper time, in the war to be waged for the object that was foremost in the 
minds of all their fellow-countrymen. We have already described how Nana and Ali Nakkhi 
Khan had acquired perfect control over the Sepoys of every regiment, and how thousands of 
Fakirs were sent into the regiments to seduce the Sepoys to patriotism. But after the mean and 
cunning trick was played by the English in respect of the cartridges, every Sepoy began, on 
his own account, to urge every other Sepoy to take the oath of fighting for their common 
80 country. In these two months, thousands of letters were sent from Barrackpore, in the name of 
the Nabob of Oudh, to the regiments stationed in the Panjab, in Maharashtra, and at Meerut, 
Umballa and other places. When immense bags full of letters were carried in the post, the 
English had their suspicions roused, and they – especially Sir John Lawrence – began to open 
these letters. All this time an extraordinary self-confidence had been created in the Sepoys. 
16. Inne’s Sepoy Revolt, p.55. 
The Englishmen asked the Sepoys wounded in the battle of Kali Nadi and ordered to be 
blown from cannon mouths how they dared to rise against them; and the Sepoys replied, “If 
Sepoys are united, the whites would be like a drop in the ocean.” A letter of one of these 
opened by the English says, “Brothers, we ourselves are thrusting the foreigners’ sword into 
our body. If we rise, success is assured. From Calcutta to Peshawar, there will be an 
uncontested maidan.” The Sepoys used to call together meetings secretly in the night. All 
resolutions were passed in the general meetings, and all decisions passed in the inner circles 
were obeyed strictly and by all. When they used to come to the secret societies, they used to 
conceal their identity by covering their faces completely, leaving only their eyes uncovered, 
and then speak about the thousand and one oppressions committed in the country by the English.17 If any one of the members was suspected of telling the name of the conspirators to 
the enemy, he was immediately put to death. In order that common deliberation should take 
place between the various regiments, it was arranged that on festive occasions one regiment 
should invite another to a feast and, on this pretext, united gatherings were carried on 
successfully. Meetings of select Sepoys were held in the house of the Subahdars. Though all 
political and religious wrongs were explained and commented on to the lowest Sepoy in the 
army, though every Sepoy knew about, and was anxious for, a fight with the English, still the 
knowledge of how to rise, when to rise, and who were the leaders of the various groups was 
not imparted to all. The work of deciding all these things was left to the officers, and every 
one was made of Tulsi, or by the Koran, that each one would do what the regiment should 
undertake to do. When one regiment was thus bound together, the chief committee of that 
regiment began negotiations with the chief committee of another regiment; each swore 
faithfulness to the other and they worked together. The mutual oath of the regiments, like the 
mutual oaths of the Sepoys were determined and decisive. Every regiment was a unit in the 
higher organisation. The English afterwards gathered a good deal of material to determine 
what this organisation was, and Mr. Wilson gives the following information about the 
81 
17. “These incendiary fires were soon followed by nocturnal meetings. Men met each 
other muffled faces and discussed in excited language the intolerable outrages the British 
Government had committed upon them.” Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.I, p.365. “On the parade 
ground, about 1300 men were assembled. They had their heads covered so that only a small 
part of the face was exposed. They said they were determined to de for their religion.” – 
Narrative of the Indian Mutiny, p.5 
society, in the Government report : “From the available evidence I am quite convinced that the 31st of May, 1857, had been decided on as the date for simultaneous rising. Every 
regiment had a committee of three members; and this committee used to do everything 
connected with the Mutiny. The Sepoys had no idea what decisions were arrived at. Tye 
mutual agreements between the various regiments simply amounted to agreeing to do what 
the other regiments would do. The committee had to decide on all important schemes, to do 
all the correspondence, and several other things. All came to the one important decision that the Sepoys should rise on the 31st. As it was a Sunday, they would be able to find a large 
number of European officers in church. All European officers, along with these, were to e 
murdered. Then all the treasuries, that would be full with the proceeds of the Rabbi crops, 
were to be looted. Jails were to be broken open and prisoners released. For in the North- 
Western provinces, from the prisoners alone an army of nearly 25,000 people could be 
formed.” As soon as the rising rook place, the power-magazines and armouries were to be 
taken possession of. All forts and strategic positions were to be taken, wherever possible. 
Such was the secret structure of the Revolutionary Organisation, and it had bound together 
the whole army. 
To supply the sinews of war to the secret organisation, the Sahukars of Lucknow, the palaces 
of Nana and Vizier Ali Nakkhi Khan, the Mahal of Delhi, and other heads of the 
Revolutionary party were sufficient. While the Sepoys were concerting their secret schemes, 
some secrets, now by a trifling mistake, now through a traitor, leaked out. Then, the English 
Government issued orders that the whole regiment about which the suspicion of disaffection 
arose should be at once dismissed. That, was most excellent. Why ? The Government thus 
actually gave to the country so many volunteer Sanyasis to spread the fire of Revolution all 
round. The various Durbars of Hindusthan, the ordinary people, and the military – these three 
divisions of the people were linked together by the indefatigable efforts of the able 
Revolutionary leaders. There still remains the class of civil officers. An outline of the 
82 
particular part which this class played in the structure of the Revolution must be given. The 
coming pages will clearly show that most of the more prominent Indian civilians in Northern 
India had taken a leading part in the “mutiny”. From the Patel and Kulkarni of the village to 
the native judge of the high court, Hindu and Mussalman officers of all ranks, pleaders and 
clerks, had joined the Revolutionary Organisation secretly. The fact that the Government had 
not the least idea of the extensive organisation is easily explained; for these native officers 
alone are the eyes with which the Government was to see anything. But, on the other hand, it 
had been decided that, until the critical moment, these Government officers should not show 
even the least opposition to the Sirkar. Not only that, but very often it happened that, when it 
was necessary to arrest a Revolutionary leader, these Indian officers, who were the 
accomplices of this man, used to treat him as cruelly as an English officer would do, and used 
to sentence him to heavy punishment. When the Meerut Sepoys were tried, it was the native 
judges that passed heavy sentences on them; but it came to light that these very judges were 
scheming for a Revolution. Anonymous proclamations were posted at every square of the city 
of Lucknow, written invery strong language, to agitate the masses. These proclamations were 
couched in fiery and violent language. We give the following as a specimen. “Hindus and 
Mahomedans, rise unitedly and decide, once for all, the fate of the country; for, if this 
opportunity is allowed to slip by, not a single way will be left open to the people even to 
preserve their lives. This is the last chance. Now or never!” Though the English authorities 
knew well that proclamations were issued every day, they could to no more than tear them 
off; and still, every time they were destroyed, new ones were put up. The police used to 
declare that it was impossible for them to find out as to who put up these posters and when 
they were put up. The English came to know the reason soon after. The police themselves were the prominent members of the Revolutionary party.18 
Not alone in the revolution of Russia, but in the Revolution in India, too, the police were 
found to be in sympathy with the people. The programme, then, of the civil officers was to 
join secretly in the Revolutionary organisation of their countrymen without giving up 
government service and, when the right time came, to work on under Swarajya, performing 
those very functions which they were all doing under the English government. 
Now that the wheels of the secret machinery of the Revolution were set in motion, it was 
necessary to arrange that all the various motions should be synchronised. With this purpose in 
Bengal, a messenger of the Revolutionaries went to the cantonments, taking a red lotus in his 
hand. He would give the red lotus into the hands of the chief Indian officer in the first 
83 
regiment. The chief would pass it to the one next to him, and so the red lotus would pass from 
Sepoy to Sepoy through the hands of all the thousand Sepoys, and then the last Sepoy would 
return it back to the Revolutionary messenger. That was enough ! Without a whisper or a 
word, the messenger would pass on like an arrow and, as soon as the next regiment was in 
18. Red Pamphlet: Part II. 
sight, he would give the red lotus in the hands of its chief officer. In this way, the 
organisation, so full of poetry, became impressed with one opinion, with revolution, with 
blood. The red lotus was the final seal of the organisation. What a tumult of thoughts must be 
raging in the mind of every Sepoy when he touched the red flower! That courage which it 
would have been impossible for the eloquence of orators to inspire was imparted in those warlike fellows by the dumb lotus flower and by the mute eloquence of its red, red colour.19 
A lotus flower! The symbol, the poet-appointed symbol, of purity, victory, light! And its 
colour red, vivid red! The very touch of the lotus flower makes every heart bloom. When the 
Sepoys, hundreds upon hundreds, were passing on rapidly from hand to hand this lotus 
flower, the eloquence of it must have been full of wild suggestions and wilder aspirations. 
“The red lotus really made all the people one; for, in Bengal, both the Sepoys and 
agriculturists were found giving expression to this one sentiment, ‘All is going to be red!’, 
with a movement of the eyes which betrayed an extraordinary, mysterious pregnancy of meaning”. 20 ‘All will be red’- with what? 
This red lotus and this suggestive sentiment had made all “one-voiced” as far as individuals 
were concerned. But, it was also necessary to make all the principal nuclei one-voices 
through mutual visits. So Nana came out from the palace of Brahmavarta to link together into 
one chain the various links – nuclei of the organisation. With him started his brother, Bala 
Sahib, and his amiable and witty councillor, Azimullah. And why did they start? “For a 
pilgrimage!” Indeed! A Brahmin and a Moslem are starting together, arm in arm, to visit the 
holy, religious places, - an event without a precedent! 
84 
19. “A man apeared with a lotus flower and handed it to the chief of the regiment. He 
handed it on to another-every man took it and passed it on and, when it came to the last, he 
suddenly disappeared to the next station. There was not, it appears, a detachment, not a 
station in Bengal, through which the lotus flower was not circulated. The circulation of this 
simple symbol of conspiracy was just after the annexation of Oudh.” – Narrative of the 
Mutiny: p.4. (The book also gives the picture of the flower.) 
20. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore. 
This was in the March of 1857. Most essential was it now, indeed, to visit at least once the 
places of pilgrimage – and the first that they visited was Delhi. Only the Dewan-I-Khas or, 
perhaps, the atmosphere of Delhi could speak about the accents with which the consultations 
were carried on! At this very time, a judge of Agra, one Mr.Morel, came to see Nana. The 
later gave him such a hearty welcome that he did not have the least suspicion about the 
diffrerent kind of welcome which Nana was busy preparing for the English and which he was 
going to offer within a month or two. After supervising all arrangements at Delhi, Nana went to Umballa. On the 18th of April, he reached Lucknow, the important centre among the 
various nuclei. On that very day the people of Lucknow had followed the buggy of Sir Henry 
Lawrence, Chief Commissioner Sahib, and pelted him with a shower of mud and stones. And 
now Shrimant Nana had come there! This infused the whole city of Lucknow with an almost 
uncontrollable joy and excitement. Nana started in a huge procession through the chief streets 
of Lucknow, and a strong confidence was instilled in the Revolutionary party on seeing their 
would-be commander. Nana voluntarily went to Sir Henry Lawrence and told him that he had 
come to see Lucknow out of simple curiosity. Sir Henry issued orders to all the officers to 
show due respect to Nana. Poor Sir Lawrence! He did not know what this simple curiosity 
meant. After visiting Lucknow, Nana went to Kalpi. The diplomacy of Nana was actgively 
going on, this time with Kumar Singh of Jagadishpur who was in intimate correspondence with him about this time.21 
Thus after personally visiting the leaders of the principal nuclei at Delhi, Umballa, Lucknow, 
Kalpi, etc., and drawing up a clear programme and a definitely outlined map of the future campaign, Nana returned to Brahmavarta about the end of April.22 
21. Red Pamphlet. 
85 
22. Nana must have gone during this tour to many other cities, but, as English 
historians have not expressly mentioned them, they cannot be given. The following quotation 
is rather important: “Afterwards, the worthy couple (Nana and Azim), on the pretence of a 
pilgrimage to the hills, visited the military stations all along the main trunk road and went so 
far as Umballa. It has been suggested that their object is going to Simla was to tamper with 
the Gurkha regiments stationed on the hills. But finding, on their arrival at Umballa, a portion 
olf the regiment were in cantonments, they were unable to effect their purpose with these men 
and desisted from their proposed journey, on the plea of the cold weather.” –Russel’s Diary. 
While, by visiting the principal leaders, Shrimant Nana was touring to determine the date and 
bring about the necessary unity of purpose, a strange band of secret messengers to Revolution 
were going about at express speed throughout the length and breadth of India, to prepare the 
people for the great day. These messengers were not a new thing at all. Whenever the work of 
Revolution was started, these agents – Chapatees – have as a rule done the work of carrying 
the errand far and wide in the land. For, in the Mutiny of Vellore, too, Chapatees were used 
to perform the same function. These angels with unseen wings were flying through every 
secret corner of the country, setting the mind of the whole country on fire by the very 
vagueness of the message. Whence they came and whither they went, no one could say. To 
those alone who were expecting them these strange symbols carried the exact message and 
spoke with limited significance; as for those whom they took unawares, illimitable was the 
conversation that they carried on! Some silly Government officers tried to get hold of these 
Chapatees, cut them to small crumbs, powered them, and powered once more, and tried if 
they could give some message; but, like witches the Chapatees had to tongue when they were 
asked to speak. The Chapatee spoke only to those it meant to speak to. It was made from 
wheat or millet flour. Nothing was written on it; yet it inspired the men who knew it with a 
strange Revolutionary energy at its very touch. The Choukidar of every village had it. He ate 
a bit of it first himself and gave the rest, as Prasad, to those who asked. The same number of 
Chapatees were made afresh and sent to the inhabitants of the neighbouring villages. The 
Choukidar of the latter place would send it to yet another village and, so, this fiery red cross 
of India travelled from village to village, kindling with flames every village it touched. Speed 
on, Angel of Revolution, speed on! Go thou forth to preach the Gospel to all the dear children 
of India, that the country is ready for a holy war to make everyone of them free. Dash on, 
Messenger, to all the ten directions, not stopping even at midnight, piercing the air with the 
age-inspiring cry, “The Mother goes forth to the war! March on! March on!! Save her!!!” The 
gates of the cities are closed; still wait not thou till they open – but fly over through the air. 
The mountain-defiles are deep; broken are the steep ascents; the rivers are wide, the forests 
86 
are dangerous; still dread thou not, but speed like an arrow with this terrible national 
message. On thy speed depends the life or the death of the Desh and the Dharma. Hence 
cover as many miles as thou possibly canst and race with the wind! When the enemies 
destroy one shape of thee, go, thou miraculous Angel, assuming hundreds of forms at this 
critical period of our national existence! In every shape and form of thy speed create for 
thyself a thousand tongues. Invite all-wife and husband, mother and child, sister and brother- 
to come with their relatives to accomplish the predestined task! Invite the spears of the 
Mahrattas, the swords of the Rajputs, the Kirpan of the Sikhs, the Crescent of the Islamites - 
invite one and all to make the ceremony a success. Call the Goddesses of War at Cawnpore! 
Call the Goddesses of the forts in Jhansi! Call the Goddesses of Jagadishpur. To bless the 
work of national Revolution, bring with thee all thy relations, drums and trumpets, flags and 
banners, clarionets and war-songs, thunderings and war-cries. The martial spirit of the nation 
is awaiting the signal. Tell them all, “The auspicious hour is soon to strike; so, be ready!” 
Ready! Friends, be ready! And, O unfortunate Tyranny sleeping unconsciously and proud on 
the green, green hills, be thou ready too! The world might believe that a hill appearing green 
from a distance is really green. Nor does it fully know yet what a mistake it is to trample 
under foot the crown of such a hill. Trample, aye, trample! Now shines forth the year 1857, 
and in a moment it will be clear that the description of Kalidas applies literally to India. “In 
those whose wealth is their penance and patience, forget not there is a concealed fire, which, 
if it bursts forth, can consume the whole world!” O world! Our India has certainly patience as 
its prominent feature; but do not, on that account, take undue advantage of it for within her 
heart, whose treasure is all-forbearing calmness, resides concealed, the terrible fire for 
vengeance too. Hast thou ever beheld the third eye of Shankar? That is calmness itself while 
it is closed; but from it can issue the flames which can reduce the whole universe to ashes! 
Hast thou ever beheld a volcano! Apparently it is clothed with soft green vegetation; but let it 
once open its jaws, and then all sides will begin to pour forth boiling lava. Like unto that this 
living volcano of Hindusthan, fierce as the third eye of Shankar, has begun to boil. Terrible 
streams of lava in its interior are bubbling up tumultuously. Dangerous mixtures of explosive 
chemicals are being formed, and the spark of the love of liberty has fallen on it. Let Tyranny 
take heed when it is not yet too late! Neglect it in the least, and a thunderous explosion would 
teach insolent Tyranny what a volcanic vengeance really means! 
END OF PART I 
87 
PART II THE ERUPTION 
CHAPTER I SHAHID MANGAL PANDAY 
OF all the surprising incidents connected with the Revolution of 1857, the most striking was 
the secrecy with which the vast movement was organised. The clever English administrators 
had so little information about the source of the movement, even after the tremendous 
revolutionary upheaval all over Hindusthan, that, even a year after open mutiny had broken 
out, most of them still persisted innocently in the brief that it was due to the greased 
cartridges! The English historians are now beginning to understand that the cartridges were 
only an incident and they themselves now admit that it was the holy passion of love of their country and religion that inspired the heroes of the war of 1857.1 We cannot sufficiently 
admire the skill of the leaders like Nana Sahib, Moulvie Ahmad Shah, and Vizier Ali Nakkhi 
Khan, who perfected that organisation with such secrecy under the very nose of the English 
officials in Hindusthan. It is difficult to find a parallel to the capacity for secret organisation 
1. Malleson says: “In this lesser sense, then, and in this only, did the cartridges 
produce the mutiny. They were instruments used by the conspirators, and those conspirators 
were successful in their use of the instruments only because, in the manner I have 
endeavoured to point out, the mind of the Sepoys and of certain sections of the population 
had been prepared to believe every act testifying bad faith on the part of their foreign 
masters.” 
88 
Medley says: “But, in fact, the greased cartridges was merely the match that exploded 
the mine which had, owing to a variety of causes, been for a long time preparing.” 
“Mr.Disraeli dismissed the greasing of the cartridges with the remark that nobody 
believed that to have been the real cause of the outbreak.” – Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, 
Vol. I, page 629. 
One author goes further and says: “That the fear about the cartridges was mere pretext 
with many is shown beyond all question. They have not hesitated to use freely when fighting 
against us, the cartridges which, they declared, would, if used, have destroyed their caste.” 
displayed by these men, who successfully taught the necessity of mutual help and united 
action to the Hindus and Mahomedans, and infused the revolutionary spirit among all classes 
of the people – sepoys, police, zemindars, civil officials, peasants, and bankers; and who 
harmonised all these conflicting elements into an army fired with the sacred purpose of 
freeing the motherland; and all this, without letting the English have any adequate suspicion 
of this vast upheaval. Just as this secret organisation was becoming ripe, the Government 
began to force the greased cartridge on the soldiers in Bengal. It appeared probable that the first experiment would be made on the 19th regiment. It was the month of February. Of all the regiments stationed in Bengal, the 34th was most anxious to start the Revolution. This 
regiment being stationed at Barreackpore, Vizier Ali Nikkhi Khan who stayed near Calcutta 
had bound the whole regiment by oaths in favour of the Revolution. Some companies of this regiment has been sent to the men of the 19th, and these had brought over the whole of that 
regiment to the national cause. The English had no notion of this and decided to force the cartridges first on the 19th regiment as an experiment. But the regiment openly refused to 
accept them and made plain their determination even to draw their swords, if necessary. 
Seeing this, the English, in pursuance of their policy, began to put down the “natives”. But 
the English officers soon saw that they were not the “natives” of past days. The clashing of 
swords soon convinced them of that. But they had quietly to pocket this insult, because, in the 
whole province, they had no white troops with which to overawe the Sepoys. To remove this 
difficulty, an English regiment was ordered from Burma to Calcutta in the beginning of March. The order went forth that the 19th regiment was to be disarmed and disbanded. It was 
decided to execute this order at Barrackpore! 
But the Barrackpore regiment was not going to see quietly the spectacle of its countrymen 
being dishonoured. The sword of Mangal Panday positively refused to rest in its scabbard. The 34th regiment wanted to leave the Company’s service quite as much as the 19th. Hence all 
89 
patriots thought it was best that the Company itself disbanded the 19th. The wiser leaders 
counselled patience for one month until all were consulted. And letters had already been sent 
from Barrackpore to various regiments to fix the signal day. But Mangal Panday’s sword 
would not wait! 
Mangal Panday was a Brahmin by birth. He took up the duties of a Kshatriya and was a 
valiant young soldier. Into the heart of this young and brilliant Brahmin who loved his 
religion more than his life, and who was pure in his private life and undaunted in battle, the 
idea of the freedom of his country had entered and electrified his blood. How could his sword 
be patient? The swords of martyrs never are. The crown of martyrdom shines only on the 
head of those, who, regardless of success or failure, bathe their cherished ideals with their hot 
blood. But from this apparently useless waste of blood does the sacred image of victory 
spring forth. The idea that his brethren were going to be insulted before him fired Mangal 
Panday’s heart, and he began to insist that his own regiment should rise on that very day. 
When he heard that the leaders of the Organisation would not consent to his plan, the young 
man’s spirit became uncontrollable, and he at once snatched and loaded his gun, and jumped 
on the parade-ground, shouting, “Rise! ye brethren, rise! Why do you hold back, brethren? 
Come, and rise! I bind you by the oath of your religion! Come, let us rise and attack the 
treacherous enemies for the sake of our freedom.” With such words, he called upon his 
fellow-soldiers to follow him. When Sergeant-major Hughson saw this he ordered the Sepoys 
to arrest Mangal Panday. But the traitor-Sepoys whom the English had been used to count 
upon upto now were nowhere to be found. Not only did no Sepoy move to arrest Panday at 
the orders of the officer, but a bullet from Panday killed the officer, and his corpse rolled on 
the ground! Just at this time, Leiutenant Baugh came upon the scene. While his horse was 
prancing forth on the parade, another bullet from Panday struck the horse and brought both 
the horse and the rider to the ground. While Panday was loading his gun again, the officer got 
up and aimed his piston at Panday; but the latter, undismayed drew out his sword. Baugh 
fired but missed his mark; he then drew his sword; but before he could use it Panday struck 
him down rolling again. While another white man was charging Panday, a Sepoy smashed his 
head wioth the barrel of his gun; and a shout arose from among all the Sepoys, “Do not touch 
Mangal Panday!” Immediately, Colonel Wheeler came and ordered Mangal Panday’s arrest. 
Another shout arose,. “We would not even touch the hair of this sacred Brahmin.” The 
colonel, on seeing the blood of Englishmen flowing and the Sepoys in such mood, speedily 
retreated to the bungalow of the general. On the parade Mangal Panday continued waving his 
hands full of blood in the air, shouting tremendously all the time, “Rise! Brethren, rise!” 
90 When General Hearsey heard this, he took some European soldiers and rode hastily towards 
Panday. Seeing that he would soon fall into the hands of Feringhis and preferring death to 
falling into the hands of the enemy, Mangal Panday turned the gun towards his own breast, 
and immediately his sacred body lay wounded on the parade ground. The wounded young 
soldier was taken to the hospital, and the English officers returned to their tents, amazed at the bravery of this Sepoy. This was on the 29th of March, 1857. 
Mangal Panday was, then, tried before a court-martial. During the inquiry, attempts were 
made to compel him to reveal the names of other conspirators. But the valiant youth bluntly 
refused to do so. He also said that he had no personal malice against the officers whom he 
shot. If there has been any personal malice, Mangal Panday’s name would have been in the 
list of assassins and not of martyrs. But Mangal Panday’s brave deed was done through 
devotion to a high and noble principle. His sword came out of its scabbard to defend his 
country and religion, “thinking alike of victory and defeat,” as the Bhagavat Gita enjoins. He 
came out with the firm resolution to die rather than face the insult to his country and religion. 
In this his bold attempt, his bravery as well as his patriotism are worthy of the highest praise. He was condemned to be hanged. The 8th of April was the day fixed for the execution. 
Whatever might be the inspiring splendour in the actual blood of martyrs, the very names of 
martyrs inspire us with noble sentiments! What, then, must be the power of the martyr over 
those who believed in him when he was before them in flesh and blood, ready to undergo 
martyrdom? It is no wonder that a divine love for him inspired all those who saw Mangal 
Panday. Not even a low-class man could be found in the whole Barrackpore to act as 
executioner! At last four hangmen had to be brought from Calcutta to do the dirty work! Mangal Panday was carried to the scaffold on the morning of the 8th, surrounded by soliders. 
He walked with a steady step through the banks and ascended the scaffold. While he repeated 
once more that he will never give out the names of any of the conspirators, the noose dropped 
and the glorious soul of Mangal Panday left the body and went to Heaven! 
This was the first skirmish of the Revolutionary War, and so died the first martyr. We always 
ought to remember with pride in our heart the name of Mangal Panday, whose blood was the 
source of the river of martyrdom! The seed of freedom that had been sown for the three years 
and more, was first watered with hot blood from the body of Mangal Panday! When the time 
comes to get its crop, let us not forget who first boldly came forward to nourish it 
91 
Mangal Panday is gone, but his spirit has spread all over Hindusthan; and the principle for 
which he fought has become immortal! He gave not only his blood but his sacred name also 
to the Revolution! It has become a nickname for all those who fought for religion and country in the war of 1857 whom friends and foes alike called by the appellation of “Panday.”2 Let 
every mother teach her son the story of this hero with pride. 
2. “The name has became a recognised distinction for the rebellious Sepoy throughout 
India.” – Charles Ball. 
“This name was the origin of the Sepoys generally being called Pandays”- Lord 
Roberts’s Forty-one years in India. 
CHAPTER II MEERUT 
THE seed of rvolutionary martyrdom soaked in the blood of Mangal Panday was not long in 
taking root. The Subahdar of the 34th regiment was charged with holding secret revolutionary meetings at night and beheaded. And when documents were found proving that the 19th and 34th regiments had secretly planned to raise a revolution, they were both disarmed and 
disbanded. This was a “punishment” in the eyes of the Government, but the Sepoys of these 
regiments looked upon it at as great honour. The European regiments were kept ready on that 
day, and the English officers were confident that the Sepoys would repent of their 
disobedience after being disbanded. But thousands of Sepoys willingly laid down their arms 
like some unholy object, and broke with pleasure the chains of slavery. They tore away their 
boots and uniforms and proceeded to take a bath in the neighbouring river, as if to wash away 
the sins of slavery. It was the custom for the Sepoys to buy military caps out of their own 
money, so the Company allowed them to take them back as their private property. But were 
they going to done the emblem of slavery again after the purificatory bath in the river? No, 
no. No one would commit such an impiety! The days are gone when India would don other 
people’s caps! Throw away these slavish caps! Thousands of caps began to fly in the air! But 
through the obstinacy of the force of gravitation, they fell again on India’s soil! The Goddess 
has been polluted again! Run, Sepoys, run even before the English officers tear those other 
badges of slavery, and trample these into dust! Thousands of Sepoys began to trample upon 
the polluted caps; and, seeing the Sepoys dance upon the caps, which was an insult to their authority, the English officers were petrified with astonishment and rage.1 
92 
Mangal Panday’s blood not only sowed the seeds of freedom in the regiments stationed in 
Bengal, but electrified also Umballa on the other side of India. Umballa was the chief head- 
quarters of the English army, and the English Commander-in-Chief Anson stayed there. The 
Sepoys at Umballa struck upon a new plan, that of burning of house of every officer that went 
against them! Every night the houses of tyrants and traitors used to receive the unwelcome 
visit of fire. The work was done so swiftly and secretly that it seemed as if the God of Fire 
1. Red Pamphlet, part I, page 34. 
Himself had become a member of the Secret Society. There were so many fires and 
thousands of Rupees were offered to discover the culprit, but no revolutionary played the part 
of a traitor! At last, the Commander-in-Chief Anson wrote to the Governor-General in 
despair, “It is really strange that the incendiaries should never be detected. Every one is on 
the alert here, but still there is no clue to trace the offencers.” Towards the end of April, he 
writes further : “We have not been able to detect any of the incendiaries at Umballa. This 
appears to me extraordinary; but it shows how close are the combinations among the 
miscreants who have recourse to this mode of revenging what they conceive to be their 
wrongs, and how great is the dread of retaliation to any one who would dare to become an 
informer!” The English Empire is based on Indian treachery! So, in Umballa, when not a 
single man turned traitor, the Commander-in-Chief of the English became helpless and began 
to thirst secretly for revenge, at the same time wondering at the secret conspiracy of the 
Sepoys! 
These fires had now begun in various places in Hindusthan. It is but natural that there should 
be sparks blown up here and there before the vast final conflagration broke out. Since the 
visit of Nana Sahib, Lucknow was in commotion. There also the houses of foreigners and traitors began to take fire! The plan fixded upon was that on the 31st of May the whole of 
Hindusthan should burst out in a universal conflagration, so that the English should have no 
room to escape and thus die in the country they wanted to keep enslaved ! Though the 
Lucknow branch of the Secret Society had consented to this plan, the valiant Sepoys could 
not restrain themselves. Besides, the exciting speeches every night in the meetings of the Society and the sight of burning houses inflamed them still more. On the 3rd of May, four 
such uncontrollable Sepoys rushed into the tent of Lieutenant Mecham, and said, “Personally, 
we have no quarrel with you, but you are a Feringhi and must die!”2. The lieutenant, 
93 
frightened out of his wits at the sight of the fierce-looking Sepoys, implored them for mercy 
and said, “If you like you can kill me in a second. But what will you get by killing a poor 
individual like me? Some other man will come and take my place. The fault is not mine but 
of the system of Government. Then why don’t you spare my life?” At these words, the 
Sepoys cooled down and remembered that their real aim was to annihilate the whole system 
at once, and returned. But this news reached the officers, and Sir Henry Lawrence disarmed 
the regiment by means of a trick. 
2. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 52. 
But at Meerut, things were taking a more lively turn. Some Englishmen formed the novel 
idea of testing if the Sepoys really objected to the cartridges. And they decided to force them on a company of cavalry on the 6th of May. It seems only five of the ninety Sepoys there 
touched the cartridges! Once more the same cartridges were given them to be used. Again 
they all refused to touch them, and went away to their camps. When this news reached the 
General, he tried them before a court-martial and sentenced all the eighty-five Sepoys to 
rigorous imprisonment ranging from eight to ten years! 
This heard-rending scene occurred on the 9th of May. These eighty-five Sepoys were made to 
stand under the guard of European infantry and artillery. All the Indian Sepoys were also 
ordered to stand by two witnesses the scene. Then the eighty-five patriots were ordered to 
take off their uniforms were torn away, their arms were snatched off, and all the eighty-five 
were handcuffed. Those hands which so long held only swords to pierce into the hearts of the 
enemy, such martial hands were now loaded with handcuffs! This sight inflamed the hearts of 
all the Sepoys present; but, seeing the artillery on the other side, they did not draw their 
swords then and there. Then the eighty-five Sepoys were told that they were sentenced to 
rigorous imprisonment for ten years, and these religious martyrs were hurried away to their 
prisons, bending under the heavy prisoners’ chains! What sign their compatriots made to 
these religious martyrs at the time, the future will soon unfold. This sign must have 
encouraged them! We will destroy the foreign slavery, under which to refuse cartridges 
mixed with the blood of cows and pigs is an offence punishable with ten years’ hard labour! 
We will soon break not only the chains tightening round your legs but also the chains of 
slavery riveted for one hundred years round the feet of our dear Motherland! This must have 
been the meaning of the sign that they made. 
94 
This was in the morning. The Sepoys could not possibly control themselves any longer. They 
returned to their barracks, smarting inwardly under the insult and shame of seeing their 
brethren being imprisoned by foreigners for what was nothing more than an act of self- 
respect in defence of their religion. When they strolled out in the bazaars, the womenfold of 
the town said to them scornfully, "Your brothers are in prison, and you are lounging about here filling flies! Fie upon your life!”3 How could they, already chafing under injury, hear 
4. J.C.Wilson. 
women taunting them so in the open street, and still remain doing nothing? All over the lines 
that night there was a number of secret meetings of the Sepoys. Were they to wait now till the 31st of May ? Were they to sit like dummies, while their compatriots were rotting in prisons? 
Were they going to wait till others rose, when even the women and children of the town were calling them traitors in the streets? The 31st was yet very far off, and were they to remain till 
then under the banner of the Feringhis? No, no. To-morrow is Sunday, and before the run of 
to-morrow sets, the chains of these patriots must be smashed, the chains of the Motherland 
must be smashed, and the banner of Independence must wave forth! Immediately messengers were sent to Delhi, “We will be there on the 11th or the 12th, keep everything ready.”4 
Sunday dawned on the 10th of May. The English has so little information about the secret 
preparations of 1857, that they had no idea about the meetings of the Sepoys at Meerut, much 
less of their communications with other Sepoys. They began their day with the usual peaceful 
pursuits. Horse-carriages, cold appliances, fragrant flowers, airing, music and singing, all was 
going on in full swing. The servants in a few Englishmen’s houses suddenly left their 
services, but this did not cause more than a moment’s surprise. But here in the Sepoy’s camp the point was being debated, whether there should be a general massacre or not. The 20th 
regiment said that, when the English were in church, they should rise with the shout of “Har, 
Har, Mahadev!” and massacre all the English, civil and military, men and women, on the way 
to Delhi. This plan was agreed upon at last. At that time, the church bells began to toll in the 
air. The Englishmen with their wives were strolling towards the church. Meanwhile in the 
town of Meerut, thousands of people even from the villages, were gathering together with old 
and broken weapons! The citizens of Meerut also prepared themselves for the country’s 
cause. Still the English had not any serious information about this! At five o’clock, the bells 
were tolling for prayer – only it was the last prayer of the Englishmen before they were 
95 
despatched to give an account of their sins! There, in the Sepoy lines, however, the air 
resounded to the fierce shout “Maro Feringhiko!” – “Kill the foreigner!” 
At first hundreds of horsemen galloped towards the prisons to free their compatriots. The 
jailors, also, being members of the revolutionary party, left the prison and joined their 
brethren, when they heard the cry, “Maro Feringhiko!” In a moment, the walls of the prisons 
were razed to the ground! A patriotic blacksmith came forth and smashed the chains of all the 
4. Red Pamphlet. 
prisoners. What a wonderful sight when the liberated prisoners embraced heartily their 
brethren; their deliverers!Q With a lour war-cry, the heroes roded their horses and marches 
towards the church along with their brethren, leaving the hated prison behind. In the meantime a company of infantry already started the Revolution. Colonel Finnis of the 11th 
regiment had approached towards them on horseback and begun to threaten them haughtily in the usual manner. But the Sepoys rushed at him like death. A Sepoy of the 20th regiment 
emptied his pistol at him, and both the horse and the rider fell dead on the ground. Infantry 
and artillery, Hindu and Muslim, were thirsting for the blood of the Englishmen! This news 
spread to the bazaars of Meerut and Meerut was ablaze; and everywhere the Englishman was 
killed, wherever he was found. The people of the bazaars took swords, lances, sticks, knives, 
anything in fact that came to hand and were running about in the lanes. All the buildings that 
were in any way connected with English domination – bungalows, offices, public buildings, 
hotels – all were burning in a blaze. The very sky of Meerut wore a threatening aspect; there 
rose clouds of smoke, terrible flames of fire, and confused shouts from the thousand throats; 
and, above all of them could be heard the terrible cry, “Maro Feringhiko!” As soon as the 
Revolution began, according to the plan previously agreed upon, the telegraph wires to Delhi 
were cut and the railway line was strictly guarded. The night being dark, the English who 
survived were utterly confused. Some hid themselves in stables, some passed the night under 
trees; some on the third floor of their houses; some in a ditch; some disguised themselves as 
peasants, while others fell at the feet of their butlers. When darkness was falling, the Sepoys 
were already marching to Delhi, and it was the townsmen of Meerut that were accompnishing 
the work of revenge for the wrongs and oppressions of a century. The hatred towards the 
English was to violent that stone houses where they resided, which could not be burnt, were 
pounded down! The bungalow of Commissioner Greathed was set fire to. He was still hiding 
inside. The rumour went about that the people of Meerut had risen in arms and surroundedd 
96 
his bungalow. Then the Commissioner fell at the feet of his butler and implored hi form his 
and his family’s life. The butler gave the mob a ruse and led them away, and the 
Commissioner fled away from the crumbling bungalow. The mob dragged Mrs. Chambers 
out of her bungalow and killed her with knives. Captain Craigie clothed his wife and children 
in horse clothes to disguise their colour, and hid them all night in an old demolished temple. 
Dr.Christie and Veterinary surgeon Phillips were battered to death. Captain Taylor, Captain 
MacDonald, and Lieutenant Henderson were hotly pursued and killed. Many women and 
children died in the burning houses. As more and more English blood was spilled, the terrible 
cry of the Revolutionaries and their spirit became more and more violent. Passersby began to 
kick about English corpses! If in the middle somebody showed pity in striking down the 
English, thousands of men used to run there crying, “Maro Feringhiko!” They would point to 
the mark of the handcuffs round the wrist of any lately manacled Sepoy present in the 
company and would shout, “We must revenge this!” Then swords flashed out without any 
thought of mercy. 
Meerut was about the last place where the Revolution should have started in the natural 
course of events. There were only two Sepoy regiments of infantry and one of cavalry, while 
there was a complete riflemen battalion and a regiment of dragoons of Europeans there. 
Besides, the whole of the artillery was in the hands of the Europeans. Under these 
circumstances, the Sepoys had no chance of success. Therefore was it that, immediately after 
the rising , the Sepoys went away towards Delhi, leaving the work of revenge to the 
townsmen of Meerut. It was very easy to have stopped the Sepoys on the way and to have 
crushed them. But even English historians are ashamed of the cowardice, mismanagement, 
and want of foresight among the civil and military officers there. Colonel Smyth of the Indian 
cavalry ran away to save his life when he heard that his regiment had risen against the 
English. When the chief officer of the artillery was getting his guns ready and parading them, 
the Sepoys were already on the way to Delhi. Even then, the English army, instead of 
following them, remained inactive all right, as if cowed down. To tell the truth, when Meerut 
rose, the English were absolutely dumbfounded. They could not form any idea of this 
unprecedented and sudden rising till the next day! On the other hand, the Sepoys had a clear 
programme before them. It was this : to rise immediately, to release the prisoners, and 
massacre the English. Either the English were frightened at the sudden rising or the citizens 
of Meerut, plundering and burning on all sides, made it impossible for the English to seed 
where the real rising was. When they would be busy taking their bearings, the Sepoys were to 
have marched towards Delhi. This march towards Delhi was a very cleverly organised plan. 
97 
There is not the least doubt that the leaders of the Secret Society showed unexampled skill in 
taking hold of Delhi at the first heat, thus making the Rising only national in a moment, and 
destroying the prestige of the English. And the plan was as quickly executed as it was 
cleverly arranged. Before the English got news of the rising, the telegraph wires between 
Meerut and Delhi were cut, the road was guarded, the patriotic heroes were liberated from 
prison, the blood of English despots was flowing on the ground, and two thousand Sepoys, 
with their drawn swords wet with English blood, raised the significant cry of, “To Delhi, to 
Delhi!” 
CHAPTER III D E L H I 
NANA Sahib Peshwa had been to Delhi towards the end of April and all were anxiously awaiting Sunday, the 31st of May, agreed upon as the day of rising. If the whole of Hindusthan had risen simultaneously on the 31st of May, history would not have had to wait 
longer than 1857 to record the destruction of the English empire and the victorious 
Independence of India. But the premature rising of Meerut benefited the English much more than the Revolutionaries.1 It is true that the spirited and patriotic women of the Meerut 
bazaars, who taunted the soldiers and goaded them on to release their comrades, have added 
one more honourable episode to our history. But the Meerut Sepoys, by their rising, unconsciously put their brethren in unforeseen confusion by warning the enemy beforehand!2 
All the Sepoys at Delhi were Indian. They too had become restless since the heroic 
martyrdom of Mangal Panday. But the Emperor Bahadur Shah and the Empress Zinat Mahal 
had tactfully restrained them. Just at this moment, a message from the Meerut branch of the 
Society was delivered to the Delhi branch, “We are coming to-morrow; make the necessary 
preparations!” Hardly had this unexpected and strange message been delivered at Delhi when 
1. “It is certain, however, that if this sudden rising in all parts of India had found the 
English unprepared but few of our people would have escaped the swift destruction. It would 
then have been the hard task of the British nation to reconquer India or else to suffer our 
Eastern empire to pass into an ignominious tradition.” Malleson, Vol. V. “The calamitous 
revolt at Meerut was, however, of signal service to us in one respect : inasmuch as it was a 
premature outbreak which disarranged the preconcerted plan of simultaneous mutiny of 
98 
Sepoys all over the country, settled to take place on Sunday, the 31st of May, 1857.” – 
White’s History, page 17. 
2. “From this combined and simultaneous massacre on the 31st of May,1857, we were, 
humanly speaking, saved by the frail ones of the bazaar. The mine had been prepared and the 
train had been laid, and it was not intended to light the slow match for another three weeks. The spark which fell from the female lips ignited it at once and the night of the 10th of May 
saw the commencement of the tragedy never before witnessed since India passed under 
British sway.” –J.C.Wilson’s Official Narrative. 
two thousand Sepoys were already on the march from Meerut, shouting, “Delhi! Delhi” Night 
herself was then sleepless. How could she sleep amidst the terrible noise produced by 
thousands of horses stamping and neighing, the clanging of swords and bayonets, and the 
fierce shouts and secret whisperings of the marching revolutionaries? When day dawned, the 
Sepoys were astonished to find that the Meerut artillery had not been following them. The 
Sepoys forgot all the fatigues of the night and, without losing a minute, marched on with 
vigour. Delhi is about thirty-two miles from Meerut. At about eight in the morning, the first 
part of the army was in sight of the sacred Jumna. Seeing the holy Humna which seemed, by 
its cool breezes, consciously to encourage the heroes bent on the holy work of Freedom, 
thousands of soldiers saluted her, shouting, “Jai Jumnaji!” Horses began to gallop on the 
bridge of boats leading to Delhi. But did the river Jumna understand their sacred mission? It 
was necessary to let her know this and get her blessings before marching on. Then, catch hold 
of that Englishman there walking along the bridge, and let his blood be poured into the dark 
Jumna! This blood will tell her the reason why these Sepoys are galloping so hurriedly 
towards Delhi! 
After crossing the bridge of boats, the Sepoys were already at the walls of Delhi. Whedn the 
rumour reached the English officers, they collected the Sepoys on the parade-ground and began to treat them to lectures on loyalty. Colonel Ripley, with the 54th regiment started to opposed the Meerut Sepoys. The Sepoys of the 54th regiment told their Colonel when 
starting, “Show us the Sepoys of Meerut and we will then sede.” The colonel said “Shabash” 
(Well done!) and the regiment marched towards the Revolutionaries. As they advanced, they 
saw the Meerut cavalry galloping towards the fort. Just behind the cavalry, there were also 
coming on, the infantry dressed in red garments and thirsty for English blood. As soon as the 
two armies saw each other, they saluted; and the army of Delhi met that of Meerut on friendly 
99 
terms! When the Meerut army raised the cries of “Let the English rule be destroyed!” and 
“Long live the Emperor!”, the Delhi army replied by shouting, “Kill the Feringhis!” In a 
moment, Colonel Ripley, who, in confusion, began to shout, “What is this!”, “What is this!”, 
was riddled with bullets and fell down dead. All the English officers of the army of Delhi 
were similarly killed. After having thus sealed their patriotism with English blood, the 
horsemen of the Meerut cavalry descended and heartily embraced their comrades from Delhi! 
Just then the historic Kashmir gate of Delhi opened, and this army of the heroes of liberty 
entered the town of Delhi with the cries of “Din! Din!” 
The second part of the Meerut army was also trying to enter Delhi by the Calcutta gate. The 
gate was first barred, but at the terrible knock of the Sepoys, it began to open slowly, and 
soon the watchman at gate joined the Sepoys with cries of “Din! Din!!” The Sepoys who 
entered by the Calcutta gate turned towards the bungalows of the English at Daryaganj, and 
the buildings there were all ablaze before long. Those Englishmen who escaped the fire 
succumbed to the sword. The English hospital was near by and it was found that it had given 
shelter to the English bottles! It is natural that the Sepoys were engaged at the temerity of this 
hospital, after it had seen the example of the bungalows of Daryaganj being razed to the 
ground for sheltering Englishmen! So they broke all bottles and after punishing the hospital, 
they began the hunt for English blood in all the houses of Delhi! But what is an army without 
a banner and what are mere cloth banners for an army like this? So, wherever an English head 
was found, it was stuck at the ends of lances, and with such terror-striking flags did the army 
push forward at a rapid pace! 
In the royal palace of Delhi, Sepoys and townsmen were crowding together, shouting, 
“Victory to the Emperor.” Commissioner Fraser was entering the gates of the palace, 
wounded. A man called Nuzul Beg standing near him pierced him in the cheek. At the sign, 
all the Revolutionaries ran up the stair, trampling Frazer down all the way up. The Sepoys did 
not stop there, trampling him, but went upstairs to the room in which Jennings and his family 
were living. An attempt was made by solmeone from inside to bolt the door, but a furious 
knock of the Sepoys burst it open. Jennings, his daughter, and a guest fell to the sword in an 
instant. Where is that Captain Douglas, who was running already dying with terror, all 
through the street of Delhi? Kill him, too! And this Collector hiding in the corner? Give him 
also leave of life! Well, now there is not a trace of Feringhi authority left in the palace of 
Delhi! Now, Sepoys, you can surely rest a while! Let the cavalry pitch their quarters in the 
100 palace, and let the Sepoys who had marched all night take a little rest in the palace in the 
Dewan-I-Khas. 
In this way the palace of Delhi came into the hands of the army of the people, and the 
Emperor, the Empress, and the leaders of the Sepoys held a conference as to future plans. It was now evidently foolish to wait till the 31st of May as previously arranged; so after a little 
hesitation, the Emperor decided openly to take the side of the Revolutionaries. As this was 
going on, a large part of the artillery of Meerut, who had also risen, arrived at Delhi. They 
entered the palace and gave a salute of twenty-one guns in honour of the Emperor and of 
freedom. The little hesitation that remained in the mind of the Emperor, even after the 
pleadings and arguments of the Revolutionary Sepoys, now completely disappeared after this 
thunder of cannon; and the hundred Imperial yearnings in his heart awoke with a flash. The 
leaders of the Sepoys, with their swords dipped in English blood, stood before the dignified 
and magnificent person of the Emperor, and said, “Khavind! The English are defeated at 
Meerut, Delhi is in your hands, and all the Sepoys and people, from Peshawar up to Calcutta, 
are awaiting your orders. The whole of Hindusthan had arisen to break the chains of English 
slavery, and to acquire their God-given independence. At this time, take up the flag of Liberty 
in your own hands, so that all the warriors of India may assemble to fight under it! 
Hindusthan has begun to fight to get back Swaraj and if you accept her leadership, in a 
moment, we will either drown all these Feringhi demons in the oceans or give them as food to the vultures!”3 The Emperor grew spirited after hearing this unanimous and exciting 
eloquence on the part of the leaders, both Hindu and Mahomedan. The memories of Shah 
Jahan and Akbar rose before his mind’s eye, and a divine inspiration inflamed into his heard, 
that, rather than continue in slavery, it would be preferable even to die, in the attempt of 
liberating one’s country. The Emperor said to the Sepoys, “I have no treasury and you will 
get no pay!” The Sepoys replied, “We will loot the English treasuries all over India and lay them at your feet!”4 When the Emperor, at last, declared that he would accept the leadership 
of the Revolution, there was a thundering roar of applause in the vast multitude assembled in 
the palace! 
While all this was going on in the palace, in the city outside there was terrible confusion. 
Hundreds of the citizens of Delhi took up any arms they could get hold of, and joined the 
Revolutionaries and were roaming about to kill any stray Englishmen in the streets. About 
twelve o’clock, the bank of Delhi was besieged. The family of Beresford, the manager of the 
bank, was killed, and the whole bank was demolished. The mob then turned to the printing 
101 
office of the ‘Delhi Gazette.’ The compositors were busy setting into type the news from 
Meerut. Suddenly, there was a roar of “Din! Din!!” outside, and in a moment, all the 
Christians in the building were despatched. The types were thrown away, the machinery was 
smashed, and everything that was made impure by the touch of the Englishmen was 
destroyed. The great wave of Revolution then rushed on! But see the yonder church! Is it fair 
that it should hold its head high in the march of this Revolutionary War? From this very 
3. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 74. 
4. Metcalfe. 
Church have prayers gone forth to Heaven to perpetuate English dominion in India! Has this 
church preached once at least to its congregation that their dominion in India is a sin and a 
crime against liberty? On the contrary, this partisan church has sheltered under her wings 
these tyrants, to protect them and to look after their material more than their spiritual welfare. 
We have already got the reward for allowing this den of cruelty to be established in our 
midst, in the shape of cartridges mixed with cows’ and pigs’ blood! Run to that church! Why 
are you looking on? Smash that cross, take away those pictures from the walls, pound down 
that pew, and shout, “Din!” Every day the bells ring in the church. We shall, also, peal them 
on our way back. Peal on, bells, peal on! You are pealing so much to-day and still no 
Ednglishman comes to the church! How do you like to touch of these brown hands? Fall 
down on the ground! Our comrades are ready to trample you down! When all the bells fell 
down with a crash, the mob smiled to each other in a ghastly way and said to one another, 
“Kya tamasha hai!” “what fun!” 
But there, on the other side, there was even a more ghastly scene taking place. There was a 
big arsenal of the English army near the palace. In this arsenal there was a vast quantity of 
ammunition useful for war. At least 900,000 cartridges, 8 to 10 thousand rifles, guns, and 
siege-trains were there. The Revolutionaries decided to capture this arsenal. But this work 
was not at all so easy. If the Englishmen in the arsenal were so inclined, they could kill a 
large number of the attacking force; they had only to light a match. It was thus very 
dangerous to attempt to capture the arsenal. Still, without it, the life of the Revolution was not 
safe for a moment; so thousands of Sepoys made ready to carry out the task. They sent a 
message in the name of the Emperor to the officers of the arsenal, asking them to surrender. 
But such paper messages never conquer kingdoms! Lieutenant Willoughby did not even 
condescend to reply to the note. At this insult, thousands of infuriated Sepoys began to mount 
102 
the walls of the arsenal. Within the walls were nine Englishmen and some Indians. When 
they saw the flag of the Emperor of Delhi flying on the Fort, the Indians speedily joined their 
comrades, and the nine Englishmen began to fight with the courage which despair gives. It 
was evident that the handful of Englishmen could not hold out long before the terrible 
onslaught of the Sepoys. They had already determined to blow up the arsenal in case all hope 
of saving it for England was gone; because they were not certain of their lives being spared 
even if they were willing to hand over the arsenal. On the other hand, the Sepoys also, in 
spite of a certainty of losing a large number if the arsenal was blown up, fiercely continued 
the assault. To their air came also hundreds of the citizens of Delhi. Suddenly the terrible 
boom and crash, as if of a thousand cannon, which both sides had been expecting every 
moment, rent the air, and volumes of flame and smoke went up to the skies! The nine English 
heroes, instead of handing over the arsenal to the enemy, set fire to it themselves and gave up 
their own lives. With that one crash, twenty-five Sepoys and about three hundred men in the 
neighbouring streets were literally blown to pieces ! 
But it was not in vain that the Revolutionaries, at last, got hold of the arsenal at the cost of so 
many men who fell victims in the blowing up of the arsenal. The Sepoys got a good store of 
arms, each getting four guns. As long as the vast arsenal was in English hands, the Indian 
Sepoys in the chief cantonment were under the English officers. True, they had refused to 
attack their brethren; but they did n ot also rise against the English, At about four o’clock in 
the evening, the thundering crash was heard which shook the whole of Delhi. The Sepoysin 
the cantonment suddenly came together and fell on the Englishmen, crying “Maro 
Feringhiko!” They killed Gorden Smith and Revely and, wherever an Englishman was found, 
he was killed. The national vengeance awakened after a century, crushed down men, women, 
children, houses, stones, bricks, watches, tables, chairs, blood, flesh, bones – anything that 
had any relation with the English! In the end, at the strict orders of the Emperor, many 
Englishmen were saved from massacre and made prisoners in the palace. But such was the 
popular fury against the Feringhi despots that, after a struggle of four or five days, the Emperor was compelled to hand over the fifty English prisoners to the mob! On the 16th of 
May, the fifty Englishmen were taken to a public maidan. Thousands of citizens, assembled 
to witness the scene, burst forth in imprecations against English rule and the faithlessness of 
the English. When the order was given, the Sepoys kills the fifty in a second. If any 
Englishman attempted to ward off a Sepoy’s sword and implored for mercy, loud cries of 
“Revenge for handcuffs!”, “Revenge for slavery!”, Revenge for the arsenal!”, would rise up, 
and the bent English head was soon severed from the body! The massacre of the English 
103 
began on the 11th and ended on the 16th. In the meanwhile hundreds of Englishmen ran away 
from Delhi to avoid death. Some blackened their faces and disguised themselves as “the 
despised” Indians; some died of heat, while running away, in the woods and forests; some 
learnt by heart the songs of Kabir and attempted to escape through the villages in the guise of 
Sanyasis; but were killed by the villagers when the disguise was seen through. Some were cut 
by the villagers as “Feringhis” when they sat down under the trees in fatigue after walking 
long, long distances; and a few with the assistance and hospitality of kindly villagers at last 
safely reached the English camp at Meerut. The hatred against English rule was so great that, 
at the news of the massacre of Delhi, hundreds of villages determined never to allow an 
Englishman to set foot within their limits. But in none of these villages, not even in Delhi itself was a single Englishwoman outraged.5 The fact is proved by the enquiries of the 
English themselves and is universally admitted by the English historians. And still what lies 
were not circulated in England by the English missionaries at that time? We have no 
hesitation in saying that nobody has ever dares to make false statements more mean, 
despicable, or wicked, than the false descriptions given, at the time, by English missionaries 
“from personal experience,” about the events at the time of the massacre! What can one think 
of the love of truth of a nation which allows its citizens to say falsely that English women 
were made to walk about naked in the streets of Delhi, that they were outraged openly, that 
their breasts were cut, the small girls were outraged, and so on? And these were priests, too! 
The Revolution of 1857 did not take place because the Indians wanted white women! It was 
brought about, rather, to remove all traces of white women from India! 
In this manner, the storm raised by the violent ravings of the women of the Meerut bazaars, 
dug up, by the roots, in one stroke, the poisonous tree of slavery which had been standing in 
the country for a hundred years! The chief cause for this extraordinary success of the 
Revolutionaries in five days was the ardent desire among all classes of the people to get rid of 
English slavery. From the women of Meerut to the Emperor of Delhi, there was a strong 
desire in every heart to achieve Swaraj and protect religion. This desire had already been put 
into shape by the secret societies. Therefore was it that in five days the banner of Swaraj could be won on the historic capital of Hindusthan, Delhi. On the 16th of May, there was not 
even a trace left, in Delhi of English domination. Such was the hatred against things English 
that anyone who uttered a word of English was mercilessly thrashed! The rags of the English 
flag were being trodden down upon the streets; and the flag of Swaraj, from which the strains 
of slavery had been washed away by hot blood, was flying at the head of the Revolution! The 
wave of liberty rose so strong that in five days there was not even one traitor in the whole of 
104 
Delhi. Men and women, rich and poor, young and old, Sepoys and citizens, Moulvies and 
Pandits, Hindus and Mahomedans – all attacked the foreign slavery with their swords drawn 
under the banner of their country. It was on account of this extraordinary patriotism and love 
of freedom, and a confirmed hatred of the English, that the words of the women of Meerut 
could raise the throne at Delhi once more from the dust! 
5. “However much of cruelty and bloodshed there was, the tales which gained 
currency of dishonour of ladies were, so far as my observation and enquiries went, devoid of 
any satisfactory proof.” – Hon.Sir Wm. Muir, K.C.S.I., Head of the Intelligence Dept. 
These five days will be ever memorable in the history of Hindusthan for yet another reason. 
Because these five days proclaimed by beat of drum the end for the time being at any rate of 
the continuous fight between the Hindus and Mahomedans dating from the invasion of 
Mahmud of Ghazni. It was proclaimed first that the Hindus and the Mahomedans are not 
rivals, not conquerors and the conquered, but brethren! Bharatmata (Mother Ind) who was, in 
times past, freed from Mahomedan yoke by Shivaji, Pratap Singh, Chattrasal, Pratapaditya, 
Guru Govind Singh, and Mahadaji Scindia – that Bharatmata gave the sacred mandate that 
day, ‘Henceforward you are equal and brothers; I am equally the mother of you both!” The 
five days during which Hindus and Mahomedans proclaimed that India was their country and 
that they were all brethren, the days when Hindus and Mahomedans unanimously raised the 
flat of national freedom at Delhi. Be those grand days ever memorable in the history of 
Hindusthan! 
105 
CHAPTER IV THE INTERLUDE AND THE PUNJAB 
THE news of the liberation of Delhi travelled with lightning rapidity, and by its suddenness 
absolutely straggered for a moment Indians as well as the foreigners. Englishmen could not 
even grasp for a time the meaning of what had come to their ears. Lord Canning was fast 
asleep there in Calcutta, in the certainty that peace was reigning all over India, and 
Commander-in-Chief Anson was preparing to go to the cool heights of Simla. When first 
Canning got a scrappy telegram to the effect that Delhi was free, he could hardly believe his 
eyes. The Indians were in a consternation quite as much as the Englishmen, because this 
unthought-of rising at Delhi spoiled all the preconcerted plans of the Secret Revolutionary 
Organisation. And the Englishmen were not, now, likely to repeat the tactical mistakes which 
they committed while confused at the sudden rising in Delhi. They got an opportunity to 
retrieve their mistakes, being forewarned of the future great danger by this sudden shock. The 
throne of Delhi could now be wrested from the Emperor in a couple of days by a sudden onslaught. Whereas, if the rising had taken place simultaneously in all placed on the 31st, as 
arranged previously, the complete success of the Revolution would have been assured in the 
course of a single day. Though that plan failed on account of the sudden rising at Meerut, the 
taking of Delhi at once openly gave the Revolution a national character, and the sudden news 
had brought about an extraordinary awakening in the whole of Hindusthan. Now, the question was whether to take advantage of this awakening and rise at once, or wait till 31st as 
arranged before. What were the plans adopted by the Centres? Would not a rising without 
consultation of the rest produce confusion similar to that of the rising at Meerut? Such were 
the questions which the Revolutionary leaders in other places put to themselves and wasted 
106 
their time with. There is no other life-killing poison to a revolution than indecision. The 
sooner and the more sudden the spreading of a revolution the greater are its chances of 
success. If a delay is made after the first start and breathing time is given, the enemy gets 
time to guard himself; those who rise prematurely lose confidence, when they see no one 
joining them; and a clever enemy, profiting by the past, puts obstacles in the way of those 
who want to rise later. Therefore, to give the enemy time between the first rising and the 
spreading of a revolution is always harmful to the Revolution. But that is exactly what 
happened. This sudden rising in opposition to their previous plans confused the 
Revolutionary leaders in various places and they could, for the time being, neither hold back 
nor rise. 
The inevitable idleness of the Revolutionary party was of the highest advantage to the 
English. They never had occasion to hear such terrible news since fist they set foot on the soil 
of Hindusthan. The swords of the very Sepoys who so long maintained and extended their 
power were now turned against them. English Sovereignty fled from this spectacle at Meerut 
to Delhi, only to find the old Emperor, who strangled her with the left hand and wrested her 
crown away with the right! This English Sovereignty full of gory wounds, spat upon even by 
the women at Meerut, with hair dripped in English blood, with necklaces of bones, with all 
her ornaments including the crown snatched away by the people – this English Sovereignty 
now tried to enter Calcutta with a terrible moan! The English dominion in India has not the 
slightest natural strength! In this month of May, there was only one white regiment, right 
from, Barrackpore to Agra, a distance of 750 miles. Under such circumstances, if the whole 
of this region had risen according to the plan of the Revolutionary party, not one but even ten 
Englands put together could not have been able to hold Hindusthan! This white regiment was 
stationed at Danapur. There was a considerable number of white troops in the Punjab on the 
frontier, but it was necessary to maintain them there. Under these circumstances, the first 
effort of Lord Canning was to bring as many white troops together as possible. Just at the 
time, fortunately for the English, the war with Persia had come to an end and orders were sent 
to that army to return at once to India. At the end of the war with Persia, the English had 
picked up a quarrel with China and had ordered troops thither; but when this storm arose in 
India, Canning determined to stop the army on its way to China. Besides these two, the 
English regiments which were to have gone to Rangoon were detained at Calcutta, and orders 
were issued to the Governor of Madras to hold in readiness the 43rfd infantry and the Madras 
fusiliers. While this white army was marching towards Calcutta from all directions, Canning 
made one more attempt to pacify the Sepoys. He issued a proclamation and ordered it to be 
posted in every town and village. It was worded in the usual manner and contained the usual 
107 
stuff. It said, “We had no intention to interfere with your religious and caste affairs. We have 
not the least intention of insulting your religion. If you like it, you can make cartridges with 
your own hands. It is a sin on your part who have eaten the salt of the Company to rise 
against it.” But who was now going to pay attention to such empty proclamations? Where the 
question at issue was whether the English ought to have, at all, the right of issuing 
proclamations in India or not, to issue a new proclamation was not to pacify but to exasperate 
the people. Hindusthan had no time to read these proclamations, for all eyes were turned to 
the magnificent Proclamation that went forth from Delhi! It was a strange sight, two 
proclamations at once, one of freedom at Delhi, the other of slavery at Calcutta. Hindusthan 
at that time welcomed the Proclamation of Delhi. And, therefore, Canning laid aside his pen 
and ordered the Commander-in-Chief to direct his guns immediately towards Delhi. 
Commander-in-Chief Anson was at Simla when he got the telegram announcing that Delhi 
had become free. When he was thinking what he was to do, he got Canning’s order to take 
Delhi at once. The ignorance of the English about the plans and the strength of the 
Revolution was so extraordinary, that they perfectly believed that they could take Delhi in a 
week and could quell the rising before a month was over. Sir John Lawrence, Chief Officer in 
the Punjab, also sent urgent message to Anson to Capture Delhi. But Anson knew better than 
either Canning or Lawrence what it meant to take Delhi and he determined to wait until 
sufficient preparations were made. Hardly had Anson left the heights of Simla and arrived at 
the army headquarters at Umballa, when there was a tremendous uproar at Simla! A rumour 
was abroad that the Gurkha Naziri battalion had also risen, and at that the English at Simla 
lost all courage. In that year the head was unsufferable to the English even at Simla! It 
appeared that the English would now have to pay a very heavy price for the royal pleasures, 
which they had so long enjoyed in cool bungalows and beautiful pleasure-gardens. There was 
a general uproar that the Gurkha regiment was coming, and women and children ran 
wherever they would get away. In this race, the men, naturally, even with loads on their 
backs, left the women and children far behind! This exhibition of English courage was open 
for two days, but it was closed afterwards as no Gurkhas were to be seen, About this time, 
similar scenes were being enacted, also, at Calcutta. Often the rumour would get about that 
the regiment at Barrackpore was in arms against the English; and English men, women, and 
children would be seen running towards the fort. Some booked passages to England, some 
prepared all their luggage in readiness to run away to the fort, and some would hide in 
corners in their offices and leave their work aside! Such was the panic created by Meerut and 
by Delhi – and yet Cawnpore was still to come. 
108 
As soon as Anson arrived at Umballa, he began to prepare the siege-trains to besiege Delhi. 
There was never such a danger to the English in India before; but, now that it appeared, their 
real weakness came forth into prominence. Their state was absolutely deplorable. It became 
impossible for Anson to expedite matters. The English officers ordered about Indian soldiers 
just as they liked, but they could not do the same to their own soldiers! How could the 
English soldier give up in a day his haughtiness and his luxurious habits? And it was now out 
of the question to get an Indian to help in everything. Carriages, labourers, provisions, even 
stretchers and ambulances for the wounded could not be got! Adjutants, quarter-masters, 
commissaries, medical chiefs- none could get his department ready and every one was in a 
fix. What a shadowy thing is English Power in India, without the help of the Iondians 
themselves! When once the Indians were roused, the English found it extremely difficult even 
to march from Umballa to Delhi, because “natives of all classes held aloof, waiting and 
watching the issues of events. From the capitalists to the coolies, all shrank alike from rendering assistance to those who power might be swept away in a day.”1 If the Indians had 
always kept aloof like this, then, indeed, as the above writer says, English power might have 
been swept away in a day. But such a brilliant day had not yet arisen in 1857! The year, 1857, 
was the dawn after a long night’s sleep. Those who saw the vision of the brilliant day to come 
woke up and left their beds, but others, who thought it was still night, clung to their covers of 
slavery and went again to sleep. Amongst these sleepy heads, the honour of Rip Van Winkle 
was very keenly contested between the states of Patiala, Nabha, and Jhind. These states had 
it in their hand either to establish the Revolution firmly or kill it. These states lay between 
Umballa and Delhi and without their support the English rear was quite defenceless. Even if 
these states had remained passive like the others, the Revolution had a great chance of 
success. But when Patiala, Nabha, and Jhind began to deal blows at the Revolution even more 
cruel than those of the English, the chain between Delhi and the Punjab was suddenly 
snapped. These states despised the invitation sent to them by the Emperor of Delhi, killed the 
Sowars that brought the message, showered money on the English from their own treasuries, 
mustered their armies, and protected the regions through which the English armies were to 
pass, and attacked Delhi along with the English; and when the Punjab Revolutionaries left 
their hearths and homes to defend the national flag at Delhi, these Sikh states, these disciples 
of Guru Govind Singh, cruelly tortured and murdered them! 
When the English were sure of the help of Patiala, Nabha, and Jhind, they mustered up 
courage. The Raja of Patiala sent his brother with sepoys and artillery and ordered him to 
109 
guard the Thaneswar Road, and the Raja of Jhind took up the strong position of Panipat. 
When these two most important stations were thus guarded, the roads from Delhi to Umballa 
and uninterrupted communication with the Punjab were perfectly secure; and the Commander-in-Chief left Umballa on the 25th of May and marched towards Delhi. But 
Anson had become quite disheartened since the news of the freedom of Delhi. He had now, 
besides, to be roasted in the terrible heat of the plains, of which he had a great terror having 
passed his time hitherto amid the cool shadeds of Simla. Emaciated by these mental and bodily wories, the Commander-in-Chief succumbed to cholera on the 27th of May, just as he 
arrived at Karnal. On the same day, Sir Henry Barnard took charge of his office. 
In This manner, the English army, after burying the old Commander-in-Chief, was marching 
under the new one towards Delhi. At that time, the English were so hopeful of victory that 
they were openly boasting that they would fight in the morning and brink the blood of the 
enemy in the evening at Delhi! While this army was marching from Umballa, the world saw 
the secreted poison in the black hearts of these white Sepoys! 
The army at Meerut was composed of “heathens!” It is, of course, an example of the savage 
nature of Indian country and religion that they massacred "harmless” Englishmen at Meerut 
and Delhi, relying on the “rumours” about cartridges! But let not what is concealed be laid 
open before the world! Otherwise God will despise truth more than false rumours and 
civilisation more than barbarity! Ah, it will require pools of blood to wash these blasphemies 
away! 
On the way from Umballa to Delhi, in thousands of villages, all those that could be easily 
caught were immediately put before a court-martial in rows after rows, and were condemned 
to be hanged and killed in a brutal and barbarous manner! At Meerut, the Indians no doubt 
killed the alien English but it was not done savagely enough. They simply cut off their heads 
with a blow of the sword. But the English, be it said to their credit, corrected this mistake. 
Hundreds of Indians were condemned to be hanged before a court-martial in a short time, and 
they were most brutally and inhumanly tortured, while scaffolds were being erected for them. 
The hair on their heads were pulled bunches by bunches, their bodies were pierced by 
bayonets, and then they were made to do that, to avoid which they would think nothing of 
death or torture – cows’ flesh was forced by spears and bayonets in the months of the poor and harmless Hindu villagers!2 
110 Ah! But it still remains to be told to my “barbarous” readers what this court-martial was and 
is. Hundreds of innocent villagers were herded together, and then they were given “justice”. 
When there was a revolution in the Netherlands, Alva had established a similar court. The 
inquiry before this court was so thorough that sometimes the judge would go to sleep. When 
the time of sentence came, he would be awakened, and with a grave look at all the prisoners 
1. Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II. 
2. History of the Siege of Delhi. 
before me, he would say, “Let these be hanged!” This historical death-chamber of the 
Netherlands was doubtless reformed and improved upon by the English! For, their judges 
never went to sleep. Not only so, but, before their appointment, they had to take an oath that they would give the death sentence, without thinking of guilt or innocence!3 The place, 
where, after such a holy oath, English officers sit down in order to condemn all “natives”, 
guilty or innocent, to be hanged, is known in the English language as a court-martial! 
Wreaking all along the line of his march such a demoniacal vengeance on thousands of 
innocent men for the handful of Englishmen killed at Delhi and Meerut, Commander Barnard 
sought to join the white troops at Meerut before marching right up to Delhi. It has already 
been noted that the English had a considerable force at Meerut. This force was coming down 
from Meerut to join the army from Umballa. But the national army of Delhi came forth to fight with the Meerut army before the junction could be effected. On the 30th of May, the 
opposing armies met on the banks of the river Hindan. The right of the Indian army was safe 
on account of powerful guns, and the English could to nothing against it. While the fight was 
raging on this side, the left of the Indian army could not stand before the English onslaught. 
There was confusion in their ranks, and they retreated to Delhi, after leaving five guns in the field. But before the English could take possession of the guns one brave Sepoy of the 11th 
regiment, rather than leave his place, chose death instead. Others might do their duty or not, 
but he was determined to do something for his country before he lost his life. With this noble inspiration, this Sepoy of the 11th regiment, seeing that the guns would otherwise fall into the 
hands of the English, purposely fired into the arsenal, when the English crowded round the 
captured guns. There was a tremendous explosion and Captain Andrews and his followers 
were burnt down, and several Englishmen were injured. After placing so many heads of the 
enemy before his Motherland, he then placed before her his own martyr’s head! Just as the 
111 
3. “Officers as they went to sit on the court-martial swore that they would hand their 
prisoners, guilty or innocent and, if any dared to lift up his voice against such indiscriminate 
vengeance, he was instantly silenced by the clamours of his angry comrades. Prisoners 
condemned to death after a hasty trial were mocked at and tortured by ignorant privates 
before their execution, while educated officers looked on and approved.”- Holfes’s History of 
the Sepoy War, page 124. 
English historians are always singing the praises of Captain Willoughby who blew up the 
arsenal at Delhi, we shall also sing the praises of this brave Sepoy, this martyr for the cause 
of his Motherland. But, alas, even his name is not known to history! About this hero, Kaye 
says: “It taught us that, among the mutineers, there were brave and desperate men who were ready to court instant death for the sake of the national cause!4 
As the English were, thus, completely successful in this first battle, they expected Delhi to 
fall in a day or two, and used to enquire every time, by post, for news of the fall! But how 
different were matters in reality! Though, when this unprecedented and sudden revolution 
first burst out into flames, Delhi had not yet the tact and boldness to lead and guide it, yet 
every heart in Delhi was full with the intense desire not to rest until the mother-country was 
free, so long as God gave them life. So, the Depoys, despised by the populace all night on the 30th on account of the defeat they had sustained, came out to fight again on the 31st. When the 
guns of the Revolutionaries started their havoc, the English also replied with their artillery. 
Since the guns of the Revolutionaries were directed on this day with good aim and the Sepoys 
fought with stubborn courage, the loss of life on the English side was considerable. The hot 
sun of May, also, became unbearable to the English. The English tried the tactics of the 
previous day, but that would not succeed. The Ednglish prepared for a general assault 
towards the evening. But the Revolutionaries rained a perfect shower of cannon balls on the 
advancing English and, before the broken ranks of the English could reform to advance, they 
retired from the field in good order. Never mind, Sepoys, in one day you have shown great 
improvement. Even if you are so defeated again tomorrow, even then, the English are done 
for. For now they have not enough strength left even for petty skirmishes. On the first day of 
June, an army was seen marching towards the rear of the already straitened English camp. 
The English were utterly confounded when they found this army to be composed of brown 
112 
soldiers! They were preparing, with despair in their hearts, to defend themselves, when they 
soon discovered that this army was not the army of the Revolutionaries, but only the Gurkhas 
under Major Reid coming to help them. The English army from Umballa was helped by the 
Sikhs, the army from Meerut was helped by the Gurkhas! Under these circumstances, what 
were the poor Revolutionaries of Delhi to do? The two English armies, effected a junction on the 7th of June. At the same time, the seige-train prepared with the help of the Raja of Nabha 
4. Kaye’s History of the Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 138. also arrived safely. The Sepoys of the 5th regiment were entreating the Gurkhas to revolt and 
capture the siege-train as soon as it arrived at Umballa. But the Gurkhas flatly refused to 
serve their country and their religion, and the siege-train arrived at Delhi. And the united 
army of the English arrived scatheless right up to Alipur, near Delhi. 
Hearing that the English army had arrived at Alipur, the Revolutionaries again came out of 
Delhi and met the English army near Bundel-ki-Sarai. At this moment, the English army was 
in a most efficient condition, with all the necessary complement of artillery and other engines 
of war, good commanders, fresh and numerous soldiers, and an advantageous position. The 
Revolutionaries had nothing but the goodness of their cause to support them. Their leader 
was a prince who had never seen a battlefield in his life. Their number was swelled by more 
camp followers than regular soldiers. And besides, they had become disheartened at seeing 
their countrymen, the Sikhs and the Gurkhas, helping the enemy. The English on the other 
hand assured themselves that the battle would only be a great Tamasha (a show). But the 
glorious ideal of Swaraj had filled the hearts of the Sepoys with a new inspiration and a new 
courage which discounted all odds. Such was the valour they showed that the English were 
soon convinced that it was not a Tamasha, but a real, grim, life-and-death struggle. The Delhi 
artillery was so powerful that the English artillery could to nothing against it. While the 
artillerymen and officers of the English were falling, theDelhi artillery became more and 
more fierce. At this, the English ordered their infantry to rush the artillery of the 
Revolutionaries. The English soldiers came right up to the artillery and the field-arsenal, and 
still the Revolutionaries would not budge an inch! In the fight for Swadharma and Swaraj, 
these Sepoys behaved like true heroes and did not leave their posts till English bayonets 
pierced them through! But these brave heroes had not, at that time, a proper leader, or one 
who would, at least stand by them to the end, if not lead and encourage them. For, while they 
113 
were dying for their country and religion, pierced by English bayonets but still sticking to 
their posts, their Commander-in-Chief had run away towards Delhi at the first roar of cannon! 
Just then, the English cavalry charged the left, and Hope Grant with his horse artillery 
charged the rear of this unfortunate army. The field was lost and this army, harassed by 
compatriots and foreigners alike, after fighting all day, was routed, and retreated to Delhi. 
General Barnard in order to follow up the victory ordered the English army to push forward, 
and it arrived at the walls of Delhi towards evening. The result of this day’s fight was that the 
Revolutionaries lost the control of the territory surrounding Delhi, and the English got an 
advantageous position to attack the fort itself. It is necessary to record here that English 
historians applaud the Gurkha regiment under Seymour for conspicuous bravery in this battle. 
In English eyes, the names of these Gurkhas have become favoured and honoured, for this 
extraordinary eagerness and unparalleled bravery in cutting the throads of their mother’s 
sons! 
The English won the battle of Bundel-ki-Sarai with the help of the Gurkhas, but the battle 
destroyed all the fancies of their imagination; for, it killed the vain hope of the English 
soldiers that they would spend the night in Delhi and spill the arch-enemy’s blood. The 
unpleasant truth, that there were not only disorderly camp followers in the Revolutionary 
army, but that here, on the walls of Delhi, swords flashing wit the fire of righteousness were 
now unsheathed for the protection of Swadharma and Swaraj, was forced upon the notice of 
the English by this stubborn battle! In this battle, the English lost four officers and forty- 
seven men, besides one hundred and thirty wounded. But the thing which spread more sorrow 
and despair in the English army than all these losses, was the death, in the thick of the battle, 
of Adjutant-General Colonel Chester. It will be seen, later on, how English historians surpass 
English novelists when they given thelosses of the Revolutionaries. But even in this din of the 
first battle, it is necessary to say that, as regards the number of cannon which the English 
captured on that day, one gives thirteen, and the other says they were exactly twenty-six! We 
should also note that both these were military officers present in the fight! 
In this manner, on the evening of the 8th June, the English army encamped outside the walls 
of Delhi. The work of bringing the armies from Umballa and Meerut safely to Delhi 
depended solely on the movements in the Punjab. It is, therefore, here necessary to see what 
were the effects of the Meerut rising in this important province, what the Swadeshi men did 
there, and how far the plots of the English against them were successful. When the Sikh 
Edmpire was broken, and the Punjab fell, finally, into the hands of the English, Lord 
114 
Dalhousie pursued an administrative policy in that province which was calculated to destroy 
the twovirtues of love of freedom and martial spirit among the Sikhs. When the 
administration of this newly-acquired province came into the hands of the two officers Sir 
Henry Lawrence and Sir John Lawrence, they completely disarmed the people, enlisted most 
of the Sikh Sepoys in the English army, brought the larger portion of the European army in 
Northern India into the Punjab, and directed everything in such a manner that the mass of the 
people should attend only to agriculture as the chief means of their subsistence and do 
nothing else. When people become mere peasants, they lose their martial qualities; they 
become hungry for “peace” and do not easily give their consent to revolutionary projects 
which might interfere with their agriculture. This deep and profound statesmanship of the 
English proved successful in the Punjab and, within ten years of the destruction of the Sikh 
Empire in the Punjab, the majority of the Sikhs began to take to the plough and left their 
swords altogether, and those that still retained the sword put it into the hands of the English in 
order to put down their own countrymen! In these circumstances, the chief officer in the 
Punjab, Sir John Lawrence, was sure that there would be no trouble there. Like other English 
officers he had no adequate idea about the impending danger till the beginning of May, and 
he too had intended to leave Lahore for summer and go to the cool air of the Murree Hills. 
Just then, the news of Meerut and Delhi electrified the Punjab. The clever Chief 
Commissioner grasped the grave import of the news and stayed where he was, in order to 
fight those who were preparing to overthrow the English empire. 
At this time, the greater part of the Punjab army was at Mian Mir. As the camp of Mian Mir 
was very near Lahore, the Lahore fort was allowed to be garrisoned purely by Sepoys. In the 
camp at Mian Mir, though the Sepoys outnumbered te English soldiers by four to one, the 
English officers had no suspicion about them until the new from Meerut arrived, and when 
the news did arrive they found it difficult to ascertain whether they were or were not secretly 
in communication with the Meerut Sepoys. At this time, the chief officer of the army of 
Lahore was one Robert Montgomery. This Robert Mortgomery and Sir John Lawrence were 
both trained in the school of Dalhousie. They were gifted with rare coolness and courage and 
could preserve their presence of mind in the midst of the most unexpected difficulties. It was 
necessary to find out how far the spirit of national freedom had awakened among the Punjab 
Sepoys. A Brahmin detective was employed to ascertain the state of mind of the Sepoys. This 
Brahmin did the work of treachery exceedingly well and reported to Montgomery, “Sahib, 
they are steeped in revolt- they are so far steeped in revolt”- and so saying he put his hand to 
his neck. This account of the Brahmin removed the veil from the eyes of Lawrence and 
115 
Montgomery. They saw clearly that the Revolution was well organised not only innorthern 
India but that the fire was smouldering also in the Punjab, only waiting for the right moment 
to burst into flames. Thanking the premature rising at Meerut for having enabled him to 
discover this terrible secret, Montgomery immediately ordered the Sepoys to be disarmed. On the 13th of May, in the morning, a general parade was called out at Mian Mir. To keep the 
Sepoys confident in their sense of security, a grant ball was given to the English residents. 
Before the Revolutionaries guessed the secret of this apparent hunting after pleasure, in these 
conditions, they were suddenly surrounded by English cavalry and artillery. It was impossible 
for the Sepoys to see through this deceit and, when the usual parade movements were going 
on, the artillery were ordered to be in readiness to fire, and the confused Indian regiments 
were peremptorily ordered to give up their arms! The thousand Sepoys, indignant with rage 
but overawed by the strong force of artillery, threw down their arms and, without a word, 
walked away to their lines. 
While this ceremony of disarming the soldiers, who by their valour, had saved the lives of 
Englishmen, in Afghanistan, was going on, a battalion of the English force was sent to the 
fort of Lahore. This battalion, with the help of the English artillery in the forst, disarmed the 
Sepoys there and turned them out of the fort and occupied it. If there has been the slightest 
delay or slackness in this manoeuvre, within a fortnight, the whole of the Punjab would have 
been burning with Revolution; for, the different regiments of Peshawar, Amritsar, Pilhur, and 
Jullunder were anxiously waiting for the moment when the Sepoys of Mian Mir would attack 
the Lahore fort. When the news spread that the English had disarmed the Mian Mir Sepoys and taken the Lahore fort, English prestige gained a great deal of ground in the Panjab.5 
But a position of even greater importance than the Lahore fort was the Govindgurh of 
Amritsar. This latter, being a holy place of Sikhs and there being a probability of the Sikhs 
being aroused if anything happened there, the Sepoys had their eye on it. The rumour arose 
that the Sepoys, disarmed at Mian Mir, were going towards Amritsar to take Govindgur. The 
English perceived the danger and requested the Jat and Sikh peasants to protect Amritsar! 
This request was acceded to by these loyal traitors, and the fort of Amritsar. Like that of Lahore, fell into English hands. Before the 15th of May, the two towns of Lahore and 
Amritsar were kept, at least for the time being, from joining the Revolution. 
After completing all these measures for the security of the Panjab, Sir. J. Lawrence began to 
extend his labours to places outside his own province. When the news from Delhi reached 
116 
him, he said it was not a rebellion but a national revolution. Still he nursed the fond hope that 
if Delhi could be taken within a short time there would be no rising anywhere else. With this 
idea, he sent letter after letter to General Anson to take Delhi before June. Not only this, but 
he began to send contingents from the Punjab to make up the complement of the army of 
5. “Had the Punjab gone, we must have been ruined. Long before reinforcement could 
have reached the upper provinces, the bones of all Englishmen would have been bleaching in 
the sun. England could never have recovered the calamity and retrieved her power in the 
East.” – Life of Lord Lawrence, Vol. II, page 335. 
Ambala, while taking upon himself the responsibility of keeping the Punjab at peace. The 
first instalment of this assistance was the Guide Corps Regiment under Daly. John Lawrence 
had great confidence in Daly’s bravery, and therefore selected him to lead the Guide Corps 
and march towards Delhi. Daly marched towards Delhi by vorced marches and joined the 
English army at Bundel-ki-Sarai the day after the battle. In the siege of Delhi were now two 
traitor regiments – the Gurkhas were exceedingly fond of these two regiments. And who can 
say that this love was undeserved? The regiuments deserved it fully, considering the measure 
of their treachery! 
Whil Daly’s regiment was marching towards Delhi, John Lawrence took a minute survey of 
the political situatiuon of the Punjab. In that territory, Hindus, Mahomedans, and Sikhs were 
often at daggers drawn. The Punjabees had not yet felt the common national awakening of the 
Hindus and Mahomedans as the people of Northern India had. As a matter of fact, it was 
hardly ten years since they had lost their freedom. But the very Sikhs, who in 1849 fought 
furiously with the English, were now in 1857, embracing them. The key to this extraordinary 
historical mystery is to be found in the fact that the Revolution of 1857 came so soon after the 
loss of their independence. Those brave, illustratious, spirited followers of the Khalsa, who so 
hated Mahomedan slavery that they fought continuously for one hundred years and made the 
Punjab free, would certainly not have tolerated the slavery under the Engolish if they had 
realised the nature of English rule. But before the ignorant Sepoys realised the fact that 
English rule was nothing short of slavery, before they had time enough to understand it fully, 
the Revolution of 1857 broke out. The English domination came into India at a time when a 
revolution was taking place in Indian politics. Various small groups of accumulated waters, 
divided for centuries, were trying to break the dams that separated each from the rest and 
unite into a vast river. The vast river is the United Nationality of India. The great united and 
117 
compact nations of the world of to-day passed before their unity, or even for the sake of their 
unity, through an intermediate stage of disorganisation, internal strife, and disorder. If we 
look at the strife in Italy, in Germany, or even in England under the Romans and the Saxons 
and the Normans,. If we see the mortal enmity between different races, provinces, and 
religions, and the inhuman persecutions in the coursed of mutual vengeance, we shall realise 
that the strife in India was a very small matter. But who can deny that the above countries 
have now united their several peoples into strong and powerful nations to-day, because they 
had been melted in the furnace of internal strife and the fire of foreign despotism? 
By a similar process of historical evolution, Bharatabhumi was in the course of creating a 
great nation out of the heterogenous elements that inhabited it. The streamroller of English 
slavery was strong enough to crush out all the differences among the peoples of Northern 
India and make them unite together to throw it off; but in the Panja, ten years were not 
enough to make them realise the nature and effect of that slavery, in those days. And, 
therefore, the Sikhs and the Jats could not conceive the idea and help in the realisation of a 
United Indian Nation.6 
The men who represented the Ednglish Government in the Punjab understood this weak link 
in the chain of the Revolution and turned it to their advantage. They began the policy of 
increasing the hatred of the Sikhs and the Jats for the Mahomedans. They were reminded of 
an ancient prophecy which was current among the Sikhs, that the Khalsa would one day 
march on Delhi – the spot where the Mogul Emperor formerly killed their Guru –and raze it 
to the ground. Now the time had come for the prophecy to be fulfilled! But if, according to 
this prophecy, only the Khalsa Sahib were to march on Delhi and conquer, what would be the 
gain to the English? Instead of Bahadur Shah, a Ranjit Singh might rule at Delhi. It is natural 
that those whose interests lay in ousting both Bahadur and Ranjit from the throne of India 
should think it advisable to change this one-sided prophecy a litle! In this revised and 
enlarged edition of the prophecy it was so written that Delhi would be razed only when the 
Khalsa and the Company would join hands! What a prophecy! But the pity is that it turned 
out true! The English took every unscrupulous advantage of the situation. To fan still further 
the hatred of the Sikhs for Delhi, a false proclamation was posted that the first order of the 
Emperor was to massacre all the Sikhs! Poor old Emperor! What an irony! At that very 
moment, he was every day going about the streets of Delhi and saying that this war was only against the Feringhi and no damage should evermore be done even to the hair of any Indian.7 
Though the Revolutionary party tried their utmost, the Sikhs turned to the side of the English. 
118 
6. Sir John Lawrence in a letter wrote :- “Had the Sikhs joined against us, nothing, 
humanly speaking, could have saved us. No man could have hoped, much less foreseen, that 
these people would have withstood the temptation to avenge their loss of national independence.” – October,21st, 1857. 
7. Metcalfe. 
But in the Punjab, many regiments were composed of the non-Punjabee Hindustanee people 
and all of them had prepared their minds to fight against the Engloish, and were waiting for 
the appointed signal. It was not only Sepoys that vowed for freedom, but some patriotic 
sections of people outside the camp also were sowing the seeds of revolution everywhere. 
The English soon discovered that even after the disarming of the Mian Mir Sepoys the solid 
ground on which they were so confidently relying was being undermined. Though the forts of Lahore and Amritsar were secure, the arsenal at Ferozepose was undefended. On the 13th of 
May, a parade was ordered to ascertain if the Sepoys there showed any signs of mutinying by 
endeavouring to take the undefended arsenal. But the Sepoys behaved so coolly at parade as 
not to give the slightese room for suspicion of the passions that were tearing their hearts. 
Therefore, their disarming was not thought of; but only the two regiments were stationed 
apart from each other. One of the regiments was made to march through bazaar in the town. 
How little the English knew what was being exchanged at their bazaar! The spirit of 
independence was strengthened among the Sepoys there, if that were possible, by the 
pleadings of the shopkeepers and the customers and, before the regiment came out of the 
bazaar, they laiod aside their doubts and hesitations and made a firm resolve. In the moment, 
there was raised a war-crfy and the English could only blow up the arsenal as they thought it 
was difficult to save it. The Sepoys then, hurried towards the walls of Delhi, from where the 
National Flag was calling out to all Indians to rally round it! At the same moment, the town 
of Ferozepore also rose and burnt to the ground the bungalows, tenants, hotels, and churches 
of the English. Add the people began to roam about hunting for Englishment. But the latter 
had been warned by telegrams from Meerut and were, already, hiding in the barracks. The 
English army which came to pursue the Sepoys, killed everyone they came across, and, after 
following them for some distance, returned, boasting of their indiscriminate massacres and 
inhuman cruelties. 
119 
The English were as much afraid of the Afghan tribes beyond the border as of the armies of 
the Indian Revolutionary party. When the secret propagation of the revolution of 1857 was 
still in progress, the Secret Society of Lucknow had asked the help of the Amir of Kabul. 
From a letter which fell into the hands of Mr.Forsyth in August 1955, it is abundantly cledar 
that Mussulmans of Lucknow were intriguing with Amir Dost Mahomed. It said, “Ayodhya 
is now annexed, and when Hyderabad is also swallowed up, even the name of Mahomedan 
rule will not be heard of! Some remedy must be found to prevent this in time. If the people of 
Lucknow rise for the sake of Swaraj, Sire, to what extent can we rely upon your help?” To 
this question of Lucknow, the displomatic Amir replied enigmatically, “We will see to it.” 
But the Amir of Kabul having recently concluded a treaty with England, the English were 
afraid of the Mahomedan tribes on the frontier near Peshawar rather than of the Amir himself. 
Some Mullahs were sent to preach among these tribes and exhort them not to rise against the 
English. The English officers at that time near Peshawar were all bold, diplomatic, and clever 
in war. The danger on the side of Peshawar was avoided, though with very great difficulty, by 
the promptness of men like Nicholson, Edwardes and Chamberlain who were heartily 
supported by such an able officer as John Lawrence. They found out at the very first stroke 
how to enlist these Mahomedan tribes on their own side. Their greed for money was 
exploited and they were bribed to enlist in the English army. After buying these mountaineers 
with money, Sir John formed a moving army to put down the unrest smouldering everywhere 
in the Punjab. In this army were English soldiers and experienced and tested Sepoys in whose 
disloyalty to the country the English could put implicit faith. Hardly was this corps formed 
when it found important work to do; for, the news of the disarming at Mian Mir had created a 
tremendous agitation in the Indian Sepoys stationed at Peshawar. 
The bold English officers at Peshawar decided to strike the first blow and they prepared to 
disarm the Sepoys. But the English commander and other officers felt very much grieved at 
the impending insult to the Sepoys of their regiments. These English officers, on account of 
the marvellous secrecy of 1857, would not believe that their Sepoys had secretly joined the 
Revolution. However, Cotton and Nicholson surrounded them with European troops on the 21st of May and gave the order to disarm. Seeing that it was impossible to escape from this 
sudden situation, all the Sepoys laid down their arms. And their officers also, unable to look 
on calmly at that insult threw down their arms and decorations and joined the Sepoys in 
hurling curses on the Company! 
120 When the troops at Peshawar were disarmed, the English found an opportunity to turn their attention to the 55th regiment stationed at Hotimardan. The Government of Panjab was 
perfectly certain that this regiment was also revolutionary; but the chief officer of the Sepoys 
there, Colonel Spottiswoode, did not share the Government’s suspicions. He was continually 
insisting that his Sepoys would never rise against the English; still the Government persisted 
in its order to disarm them. Colonel Spottiswoode felt very much chagrined; and when, on the 24th of May, the Sepoy leaders came to him and asked him mif the rumour that the English 
army was marching against them from Peshawar was true, he gave an evasive reply and the 
Sepoys went back dissatisfied. The English were really marching from Peshawar to destroy 
this regiment, as they did at Peshawar. Rather than see the wicked and disgusting affair, Colonel Spottiswoode retired to his room and committed suicide! At this news, the 55th 
regiment attacked the treasury, took up their arms and flags, looted the treasure, broke the 
chains of the slavery to the foreigners, and marched on towards Delhi! But Delhi was not 
near. The whole of the Panjab, full of English soldiers, had to be crossed and, besides, an 
English army was pursuing them. Under these circumstances, success was so difficult that 
they questioned within themselves as to whether it would not be wiser for them to lay down 
their arms like their comrades at Peshawar and surrender to the English. But the heroes 
decided that it was better to have the noose of death round their becks than the chains of 
slavery round their feet, and they made it known by shouts to the English army following them, “We will die fighting!” And, in truth, did the heroes of this 55th regiment lay down their lives on the battlefield fighting for the freedom of their country! The story of this 55th 
regiment is simply heart-rending. The pursuit had been so hot that Nicholson was often on 
horse back for 24 hours without dismounting. Hundreds of them dies in the fight and others 
escaped beyond the frontier, fighting as they went. But who would give shelterto the Hindus 
there? The Mussulman hordes began to receive them in a terrible manner. Isolated Sepoys 
were forced to become Mahomedans there. Thus these unfortunate Sepoys fighting in 
defence of their religion turned towards Kashmir for shelter, thinking that Gulab Singh, the 
Maharaja of Kashmir, would be able to protect them. When hundreds of these Hindu Sepoys 
were talking through the stony regions, without food, without clothes, without a fire to warm 
them, towards Kashmir, weeping that there should be no one on earth who would protect 
their sacred religion, the English organised massacres of these Sepoys at various places, and 
they were killed like wild beasts! But, still, some of the Sepoys escaped towards Kashmir, in 
the fond hope of finding a protector of Hinduism. Protector of Hindus! Alas! Sepoys, you 
will soon be undeceived. When the Rajpur-born Gulab Singh of Kashmir heard that these 
helpless Sepoys who were ready to jump into the jaws of Death to save the honour of their 
121 
Hindu religion were coming towards him, he prohibited them from entering his country! Nay 
more, after giving orders that any of these Hindus found in his territory should be instantly 
killed, he very proudly let the English Durbar know of his valiant deeds! Now, Sepoys, either 
you change your religion and surrender to slavery or embrace death! Of these, Martyrs, you 
have done well in choosing death! The English were so cruelly slaughtering them wherever 
they found them that the permanent scaffolds on the maidans began to rot by the flow of 
constant streams of Hindu blood! Still the English were not satisfied. Scaffolds- permanent 
scaffolds – were tired ot performing executions, and, then, the mouths of guns were opened. And of the 55th regiment which had not spilt a single drop of English blood, every one of the 
men who had not been hanged was blown from the mouth of the gun! A thousand Hindus 
were, thus, slaughtered in no time. But, even at this last moment, (says Kaye a little ashamed 
at this terrible bloodshed), “Brave and sullen they went to their doom, asking only to die likle 
soldiers at the cannon’s mouth, not as dogs in the noose of the gibbet.” 
As regards the massacre of these brave people, in a manner which would bring shame upon 
even savages, English historians generally say that, though this was undoubtedly cruel, “the 
severity of the hour would be the humanity of all time!” The cruelty was desired in the 
interests of humanity! English historians, remember this your own sente4nce, “The severity 
of the hour would be the humanity of all time!” As you now know the meaning of this 
sentence, you will also remember it exactly on a future occasion. It is well that you perpetrate 
this cruelty for the sake of humanity, but do not forget that the Hindu Nana is there at 
Cawnpore! 
One more thing must be told here. Those English historians who vie with each other in 
dramatic descriptions of the massacres committed by the Revolutionaries, attempt at the same 
time to suppress purposely and consciously the inexcusable, unprecedented, and inhuman 
atrocities committed by their own countrymen. Before the massacre of this unfortunate but 
patriotic regiment, Heaven alone knows what brutal tortures they were subjected to by the 
demoniacal English! For English historians have clean wiped off from history this incident 
and left no trace of it at all. Kaye himself says, “Though I have plenty of letters with me 
describing the terrible and cruel tortures committed by our officers, I do not write a word 
about it, so that this subject sould be no longer before the world!” Here is a historian, indeed! 
What proof have we that the ruffians, who stuffed cow’s flesh in the mouths of harmless 
inoffensive peasants on the road to Delhi, did not also cram the throats of these brave Hindu Sepoys of the 55th regiment in the same manner before blowing them from guns! 
122 
While these inhuman atrocities were going on in the direction of Peshawar, here, in Jullunder, 
the smouldering fire of the Revolution was bursting into flame. John Lawrence had started 
the policy of disarming Sepoys wholesale in the Panjab; and Jullunder and Pilhur would have 
been so treated long ago but for the admirable selfrestraint and organising power of the Pilhur 
Sepoys. The Sepoys in the Jullunder Doab, like their comrades all over the Punjab, had made 
preparations for a rising. It was clearly given out by a patriotic Hawaldar, taken prisoner in 
the assault on Delhi, and the Government reports have recorded the same, that, all over the 
Jullunder Doab, it has been decided to rise simultaneously. The plan was that when the Jullunder army should send a corps to Hoshiarpur, the 31st infantry should rise and march to Pilhur; on their arrival, the 3rd regiment at Pilhur was to rise and all together were to march to 
Delhi. Similar plans had also been made in other places; but, before the time of putting them 
into execution, the secret leaked out and the English were forewarned. The Pilhur regiment, 
however, observed great secretary till the last moment. When the siege-train was being taken 
to Delhi, they could easily have broken it up, but not to spoil the general plan, this regiment kept outward peace till the right moment. At last, on the 9th of June, the signal agreed upon 
was made at Jullunder – the bungalow of the colonel of the Queen’s Regiment was set o fire. 
At this signal, the Jullunder Sepoys rose in revolt at midnight. As a matter of fact, the English 
had European soldiers and artillery there, but the rising of the Sepoys was so unanimous and 
sudden that, at their terrible war-cries, the English lost their nerve. English men, women, and 
children began to run away to places of safety. But the Jullunder Sepoys had no time to waste 
in massacres. Since the English guns were aimed at the flag of freedom in Delhi, every heart 
was drawn towards that place. When Adjutant Bagshwe began to interfere unnecessarily, one 
horseman galloped towards him and shot him dead. The English military officers of the place 
had, to the end, confidence in the Sepoys and informed the higher authorities that they need 
not be disarmed; and they really did trust the Sepoys. For this, the Sepoys not only refrained 
from massacring them wholesale but spared the life of those also that had not yet left the 
place. Thus, the Jullunder army kept its plan well and the officers who trusted them were spared their life. In this, the Sepoys showed great magnanimity.8 And yet, although the 
8. The English have circulated a myth and have called it the Back Hole of Calcutta 
and the whole world is execrating the memory of Siraj-ud-daulah for this wild invention of an 
English forger’s brain. Here is a blood curdling story of a real black hole which the 
123 
perpetrator himself has confessed to. “In the Panjab, near Ajnala, in a small island, many a 
Sepoy who had simply fled away from a regiment, which was working under the reasonable 
fear of being disarmed and shot by the Government for suspicion, was hiding himself. Cooper 
with a loyal body of troops took them prisoner. ‘The entire number,amounting to two 
hundred and eighty-two, were then conveyed by Cooper to Ajnala. Then came the question 
what was to be done with them! There was no means of tranporting them to a place where 
they could be tried formally. On the other hand, if they were summarily executed, other 
regiments and intending rebels might take warning of their fate, and thus, further bloodshed 
might be prevented. For these reasons, Cooper, fully conscious as he was of the enormous 
responsibility which he was undertaking, resolved to put them all to death. Next morning, 
Government and their officers had treated them kindly and they were thankful to them for 
their trust, they did not allow these private relations to come in the way of the national cause, 
and they gave up their body and soul to the cause, when the war-bugle for country and 
freedom sounded. 
Before beginning the revolt at midnight, they had despatched a horseman to inform their 
Pilhur comrades. As soon as this messener of freedom from Jullunder arrived, the Pilhur 
regiment also rose. Now it only remained for the Jullunder men to march to Pilhur! It was not 
an easy talk, for it was necessary to avoid the English artillery and cavalry; but such was the 
tumult and confusion among the English and so clear was the map drawn by the 
Revolutionaries that, at last, all the Jullunder Sepoys arrived at Pilhur in perfect order. Seeing 
thousands of their comrades coming to meet them, the Sepoys of Pilhur marched in a body to 
receive them. The comrades heartily embraced each other, and the vast army under the 
leadership of Swadeshi Jamadars and Subahdars marched towards Delhi. On the way was a 
river and beyond the river was the city of Ludhiana awaiting to kiss the dust of these heroes’ 
feet. The very morning, the English officers of Ludhiana had received a telegram announcing 
the rising at Jullunder. But it was too late. The officers had no hope of keeping the Sepoys 
there under control. For, before the Government telegram arrived, the Sepoys had got the 
information that their comrades had already left Jullunder! The English officers at Ludhiana 
resolved to bar the way of the army coming from Pilhur on the river Sutlij which flows 
between the two towns. The bridge of boats on the river was destroyed and the English, the 
Sikhs, and the auxiliary troops of the Raja of Nabha were protecting the bank of the river. 
124 
accordingly, he brought them out in tens and made some Sikhs shoot them. In this way, two 
hundred and sixteen perished. But, there still remained sixty-six others who had been 
confined in one of the bastions of the Tahsil. Expecting resistance, Cooper ordered the door 
to be oepned. But not a sound issued from the room; forty-five of them were dead bodies 
lying on the floor. For, unknown to Cooper, the windows had been closely shut and the 
wretched prisoners had found in the bastion a second Black-Hole. The remaining twenty-one 
were shot, like their comrades. 1-8-’57. For this splendid assumption of responsibility, 
Cooper was assailed by the hysterical cries of ignorant humanitarians. But Robert 
Montgomery unanswerably vindicated his character by proving that he had saved the Lahore 
division.”- Holmes’s History of the Indian Mutiny, page 363. 
When the Revolutionaries got this information they began to cross the river at night, four 
miles up the river. Some of their number had just crossed the river in boats, some were still 
crossing, while some were yet on the other bank. In this state, the English and the Sikhs 
began their artillery-fire on them. It was about ten at night and the Revolutionaries could not 
find the whereabouts of the English army. Besides, their guns had not yet crossed the river. In 
this difficult situation, the English and the Sikhs, with their artillery, fell upon them. But 
when the shock of the first attack was passed, the Sepoys, without moving an inch, kept up a 
steady fire on the enemy. The ranks of the Sepoys, though disordered for a moment on 
account of the sudden attack of the enemy defended their position for about two hours. Just 
then, a Sepoy’s bullet went right into the chest of the English commander, Williams, and he 
fell dead on the field. Now, the moon had arisen to dispel the midnight darnkess and to throw 
her cool rays on the heads of the devotees of freedom. In this moonlight, the Revolutionaries 
saw the whole strategy of the English, and they left their position and attacked the English 
boldly. Not being able to hold out before this attack, the English army as well as the loyal 
Sikhs took to their heels! 
Proud of victory that they had just won against the combined forces of the English and the 
Sikhs, the Sepoys entered the town of Ludhiana about midday. In the city, there was a 
cedrtain Moulvie who always used to breach to the people to break away from English 
slavery and establish Swaraj. On account of the Moulvie’s lectures, this town had become a 
powerful centre of the Revolutionary part in the Panjab. When the sign came that the time 
had come to deal the last blows at the chains of slavery, the whole town rose. The 
Government stores were looted and burnt. Churches, the houses of Englishmen, the presses of 
English newspapers, all were burnt. There was rivalry among the citizens to accompany the 
125 
Sepoys and show them the stations of Engloishmen and especially the houses of “native 
dogs” who used to wag their tails under the protection of the Englishmen! Prisons were 
broken. Whatever belonged to the Government and whatever was English was burnt down. 
That which could not be burnt down was razed to the ground. In this manner, Ludhiana also 
began to glow with the Revolutionary fire. 
But it was desirable for the Revolutionaries to go to Delhi. It would have been a great 
strategic and moral advantage if the Sepoys could have held Ludhiana fort, as it was the key 
to the Panjab; and if Ludhiana had also been a centre of the Revolution, like Delhi, it would 
have been a terrible shock to the English power. This was, no doubt, known to the Sepoys. 
But it was impossible for them to remain in Ludhiana under the circumstances. They were all 
more Sepoys, without a leader. They had no ammunition. If, at such a juncture, there has 
been at Ludhiana a Nana Sahib, or a Khan Bahadur Khan, or a Moulview Ahmad Shan, they 
would never have left Ludhiana. Now, they could do nothing but march towards Delhi. And 
so they proceeded towards Delhi, crying that they would now decide, at the walls of Delhi 
itself, the question of slavery or Swaraj. The English were so much demoralised then that, 
though the Sepoys used to march in procession by day, yet no one dared to suggest pursuit! 
But the enforced idleness of the Revolutionary party at other places for three weeks after the 
Meerut rising, was completely taken advantage of by the English in the Panjab. Because there 
were large forces of European troops in the Panjab, it became easy either to disarm the 
Sepoys, or compel them to revolt under odds of time and place, and then destroy them. 
Seeing that the Sikh princes and people were joining them instead of the Revolutionaries, the 
English expell all the Hindusthanees in the Panjab from the frontier up to the Sutlij and 
crushed the seeds of the Revolution in that part of the country. At this time, not only the 
Sepoys, but thousands of peaceful and well-to-do non-Punjabee Hindusthanees in towns and 
villages, were deported at the mere will be the authorities. And when the Punjab was, thus, 
completely in hand, the movement of European troops towards Delhi began on a large scale. 
There were two chief reasons why the Panjab remained in English hands. One was that the 
Sikhs sided with the English. If they had even been indifferent, the English could not have 
retained the Panjab for a single day. The Revolutionaries, naturally, spared no pains to bring 
over the Sikhs to their side. As soon as Delhi was free, a devoted servant of the Emperor sent 
him a long, detailed, and very interesting account of the state of feeling in the Panjab. In it, 
the faithful servant Taju Din says, “The Sikh Sirdars in the Panjab are all idle and cowardly, 
and unlikely to join the Revolutionaries. They have become the playthings of the Feringhis. I 
126 
saw them personally in private, had convesations with them, and spoke to them most 
earnestly. I asked them, ‘Why do you join the Feringhis and become traitors to Swaraj? 
Won’t you be better off under Swaraj? Therefore, at lease for your own gain, you ought to 
join the Emperor of Delhi!’ To this they replied, ‘See, we are all waiting for the opportunity. 
As soon as we get the order of the Emperor, we will kill these Kaffirs in a day........’ But I 
believe they are thoroughly untrustworthy.” So when horsemen came, with the order from the 
Emperor to the Sikh kings, they were assassinated! This was the first and most important 
reason why the English found it so easy to keep their hold on the Panjab; yet we cannot say 
that it was impossible to drive the English away from the Punjab, in spite of the opposition of 
the Sikhs. If advantage had been taken of the laxity of the English till the month of May, and 
if there has been a simultaneous rising according to the original plan, then, the Sikhs too 
would have been terrorised to joion a division among them; and, whatever else might have 
happened, the English could not possibly have taken hold of thousands of Sepoys separately 
and put them down. It cannot be maintained that in the Punjab there was no desire for Swaraj. 
The Brahmins of Thaneshwar and the Moulvies of Ludhiana, the shop-keepers of Ferozepore 
and the Mussalmans of Peshawar, were wandering about, preaching everywhere a holy war 
for the sake of Swadharma and Swaraj. The writer of the above-mentioned letter says, “If a 
Sirdar from the Emperor together with an army can be sent thither, the Panjab will be free in 
a moment. The Sepoys at different places will rise and rally round your banner. The English 
will have to leave in haste. And I am certain that all Hindus and Mahomedans will bow to 
your glorious throne. Besides, it is desirable that the rising should be made in this month of 
June, for English soldiers find it hard to fight in the sun. They die quickly even before 
fighting begins. As soon as you see this letter, you should send a Sirdar with an army into the 
Panjab,” etc. etc. Though popular sympathy in the Panjab was with Delhi, the 
Revolutionaries could not take advantage of it. The reason is that the wave of Revolution was 
inevitably cheked for three weeks after the freedom of Delhi. If, according to the pre- 
arranged plan, there had been universal and simultaneous risings, the English could not have 
moved anywhere; solitary and helpless regiments could not have been disarmed in the 
Panjab; the wave of Revolution would have daily gained in volume, and undecided and 
hesitating people like the Sikhs would have been carried away with it; and, seeing a glorious 
and successful beginning, those who sympathised but dared not throw in their lot with the 
Revolution would have become emboldened and,- India would have been free. 
127 
In short, on account of the treachery of the Sikhs and the premature rising at Meerut, the roots 
of the Revolution in the Panjab were all weeded out. And the Panjab being the backbone of 
Delhi, the news was very discouraging to the Delhi patriots. 
We have given, above, the movements of the Revolutionaries and of the English in Delhi and 
the Panjab during the three weeks. The English had been making all possible preparations 
during these three weeks and large contingents of European troops were constantly being sent 
from Calcutta to Allahabad. In Bombay and Madras, in Rajputana and Sind, a minute inquiry 
was made as to the sympathisers of the Revolutionary movement, and great efforts were 
being made to crush it in time, as was done in the Panjab. And, thanking God for this 
previous warning of the Revolution, they began to be confident that they had extinguished the 
flames in various places. While these preparations were going on during these weeks on the 
side of the English, on the side of the Revolutionaries all possible outward quiet was 
maintained in general, except for some small risings that took place here and there. This was the state of affairs, on both sides, on the 30th of May. We must now turn to the succeeding 
events- how this was immediately altered, how the growing confidence of the English was 
dashed to the ground, how the flames of the Revolution burst again with redoubled vigour in 
spite of the great losses it had sustained during these three weeks. Redvolutions are not 
regulated by fixed laws. They are not accurately working machines like clocks or watches. 
They have their own way of marching. They can only be regulated by a general principle; but 
they brush away minor rules by their very shock. Revolution has only one watchword- “Dash 
on!” All sorts ofnew and unthought of circumstances might arise during its progress, but one 
must stop; one must overcome them and press forward. 
Tell us now, O Must of History, how Nana Sahib the Moulvie of Lucknow, the Ranee of 
Jhansi, and other grand heroes clung to this principle with such extraordinary persistence! 
And fail not to tell, also, O History, how all Indians could not cling to it as these heroes did! 
Come and sing the songs of glory and of raise with us in the first part, and, also come and 
weep with us later on! 
128 
CHAPTER V ALIGARH & NASIRABAD 
JUST as the tremendous shock was shaking the whole of North-Western India, towards 
Umballa and the Panjab, so also in the South, another part of the country was trembling 
through another of its waves. In the town of Aligarh, below Delhi, there was the regiment called the “9th Native Infantry.” Some detachments of this regiment were stationed at Minpur, 
Itawa, and Boland. The Government had such confidence in this regiment, that they thought 
that it would never revolt even though all the Sepoys in India should rise against them. 
Though the officials heard rumours that, in the bazaars of Boland, secret revolutionary societies were rife, they believed that the 9th regiment was sure to stand aloof from them, and 
remained idle in this sense of false security. 
About the month of May, the places about Boland selected from amongst them a revered, 
faithful, and fredom-loving Brahmin, and deputed him immediately to Boland town. The 
Brahmin walked away with quick steps, his heart overwhelmed with conflicting emotions of 
hope of success and fear of failure of the errand on which he want, towards the military 
station of Boland, which on the one hand was relied upon by the English for loyalty, and, on 
the other, was looked upon with hopeful eyes by the Mother-country. Will my compatriots 
listen to my pleadings for the freedom of the Mother-country and for the protection of 
129 
religion? Or will they cling again to the dread and dark narcotic of slavery? And draw their 
swords against me for having disturbed their sleep, when I wanted to wake them and show 
them the brilliant vision ? With such feelings surging in his heart, but with his face beaming 
with a quiet light of peace, this Brahmin entered the station with his extraordinary message. 
He was well received and his message was welcomed. As to the plan of rising, the Brahmin 
said that they should all rise suddenly amidst the noisy jollity of a great of a great marriage 
procession, massacre the English, and proceed to Delhi. Of course there was nobody there 
against the principle of overthrowing English dominion, but a discussion began as to the 
fitness of this mode of realising the principle at Boland. Just then the Brahmin was arrested 
on the information of three Sepoys of the regiment. He was immediately sent from Boland to 
Aligarh, the chief station of the regiment, and sentenced to be hanged in the presence of all 
the Sepoys. While this was happening at Aligarh, the three loyal Sepoys were being disgraced 
and spat upon at Boland. The whole camp of Boland heaped curses on them and went, 
without the permission of their officers, to Aligarh where the Revolutionary messenger had been taken. On the evening of the 20th May, the Brahmin was to be hanged. The whole 
regiment was made to attend at the execution. What was to be done now? If they were to wait till the 31st of May, the Brahmin would be hanged. As they whispered to each other. “He ios 
going!” , and looked up, they beheld that the Brahmin’s body was hanging on the scaffold, 
delivering a terrible oration of REVENGE! What an oration! Instead of strings of words, streaks 
of blood were flowing incessantly! The dead Brahmin could never in his life have delivered 
such an oration as he was delivering from the scaffold without uttering a single word! For, in 
an instant, a Sepoy broke forth from the ranks and, pointing his sword towards the body of 
the Brahmin, he exclaimed, “Friends! This martyr bathes in blood!” This shaft from the 
mouth of that brave Sepoy, entered the heart of the thousands of Sepoys quicker, even, than it 
takes for a spark to explode a powder-magazine! They, at once, drew out their swords; and 
these thousands of Sepoys, mad with rage, began to dance with delirium, thundering, “Death 
to the Feringhi rule!” 
It is no wonder that the English officers were at their wits’ end after this scene. Not only did the “most loyal” 9th regiment rise, but it spoke out that, if the English wanted to save their 
lives, they should leave Aligarh at once! Taking advantage of this generosity, the officers at 
Aligarh with their wives and children, and all the other Englishmen and women there, 
including Lady Outram, left Aligarh quietly. Before midnight not a trace of English rule 
remained at Aligarh! 
130 The news of the freedom of Aligarh arrived at Minpur on the evening of the 22nd May. It has been said above that a detachment of the 9th infantry was stationed here. Anybody can 
imagine from the account of their brethren’s doings at Aligarh, what the thoughts of the 
Sepoys of this detachment wold have been. The officers at Minpur got information that a 
certain Raje Nath Singh, who had fought against the English at Meerut, had gone to a place called Jivanti. They, therefore, sent some Sepoys to arrest him. But these Sepoys of the 9th 
regiment, instead of arresting him, took him safely out of Jivanti and reported to the officers 
that no one of that name stayed there. A Sepoy called Ram Din Singh was sent by the officers 
under guard to Aligarh, for disobedience. When he was halfway, the Sepoys on guard 
released him, broke his chains and quitely returned to Minpur! This regiment, fired with 
patriotism, was only waiting for the signal to rise. But in order that the enemy might not 
cripple them before the simultaneous rising, they apparently kept such good behaviour that the 9th regiment was regarded as the “most loyal” regiment in the whole of India! But since 
the above-mentioned tour of the Brahmin, not only the Sepoys, but the whole mass of the people of the Aligarh district also, were in a rage. The Minpur detachment of the 9th regiment 
had been sent to the Aligarh district to quell the growing discontent, and, when it returned to 
Aligarh, the butchers, and even loafers in the bazaars, asked them questions like “When are 
you going to kill the Feringhis?” , “When are you going to rise for freedom?”, How would 
Sepoys have liked to postpone a work for which even butchers and loafers were impatient? 
Just then came the news of Aligarh. Seeing that their comrades had risen, they thought it 
disgraceful to wait any longer, and so they rose that same day. They, also, spared the life of 
all Englishmen who fell into their hands, took plenty of arms and ammunition from the arsenal, loaded it on camels, and started on the 23rd to Delhi. 
At the same time, a similar movement was going on amongst the garrison of Itawa. The chief 
magistrate and collector at Itawa, Allen O.Hume, as soon as he heard the news from Meerut, 
formed a select corps to guard the roads round about Itawa, with thehelp of the assistant magistrate Daniell. On the 19th this corps met a handful of Sepoy coming from Meerut. The 
few Sepoys surrendered and were ordered to lay down their arms. The Meerut Sepoys 
pretended to obey the order, disarmed the enemy of his suspicion, and then suddenly took up 
their arms and massacred their captors! Before this news got about, the Sepoys entered a 
Hindu temple near by, and his themselves there with all their arms. When the collector of 
Itawa, Mr.A.O.Hume, heard this, he and Baniell took some Indian soldiers and marched to 
attack the temple. At first, Mr.Hume was confident that the handful of Sepoys must have 
been killed by the populace even before his little corps attached them! But, when they came 
131 
near the temple, they discovered that the townsmen, instead of killing them, were singing 
their praises and giving them provisions. Though the villagers thus belied his expectations, 
Daniell thought that at least his Sepoys and police would stand by him. With immense 
confidence, he gave the order to attack the temple and himself rushed forward. But who 
followed him? Only a single Sepoy was inclined to obey his order! But this white 
commandant and his black slave were both despatched in an instant by bullets from the 
Sepoys in the temple, and Mr.Hume, who was proudly coming up, left the Sepoys in peace at 
the temple and took to his heels! 
On this day, the 19th of May, a rumour was aflot that the army at Itawa was going to rise. But 
the head-quarters were at Aligarh, and, as the order to rise had not yet come, the Sepoys at Itawa remained quite. And it would have remained so till the 31st of May but for the fact that 
in the meantime the self-sacrifice of the Brahmin martyr set the Revolutionary flames glowing. When, on the 22nd, the news came that Aligarh had rise, Itawa rose also. On the 23rd 
of May, the whole army rose, shouting, “Har! Har! Mahadeo!” , sword in one hand and a 
lighted torch in the other. The Sepoys then attacked the English camp. They looted the 
treasury, broke prisons, and told the English that, unless they left the place instantly, they 
would be indiscriminately massacred. In this terrible plight, the English took their wives and 
children with them and ran wherever they found a way! Mr. Hume himself, profiting by the magnanimity of the Sepoys, disguised himself as an Indian woman and ran away.1 When 
Hume ran away, it was proclaimed by beat of drum that Itawa was indedpendednt, and all the 
Sepoys went away to join the chief division of the regiment marching towards Delhi. 
Thus the regiment rose like one man. In places so far apart as Aligarh, Boland, Minpur, and 
Itawa, the programme was perfectly carried out- looting the treasury, announcing freedom, 
sparing the lift of the English when at the mercy of the sword, and after securing a good 
supply of provisions and ammunition, marching to Delhi. The regiment which the English 
thought would be the last to rise, thus rose sword in hand long before the others. The English, 
thereafter, could not feel themselves secure of anything! 
There is a small town called Nasirabad about twelve miles from Ajmere. In this town there was a company of English soldiers and the 30th native infantry, besides the artillery. There were, alsol, the 1st Bombay Lancers and the 15th regiment which had been lately brought from 
Meerut. In the last regiment, the hatred of the English and the desire for driving them out 
were strongest. And it would have been a wonder, if the thousand political preachers from 
132 
Meerut would have let go this opportunity of explaining personally to the Nasirabad Sepoys 
the resolutions of the Secret Society at Meerut. Excepting some men of the Bombay Lancers, 
the whole Sepoy army was unanimous, and resolved only to wait a suitable opportunity. This came on the 28th of May, for, on that day, the discipline in the artillery was very lax. Thus, at the appointed signal, the 15th regiment from Meerut took possession of the artillery. To take it 
back the English officers together with the Bombay Lancers marched upon them. But, in a 
very short time, the Lancers retired with widsom, and the English officers fell dead on the 
ground. Newbury was not only killed but his body was blown to pieces! Colonel Penny and 
Captain Spottiswoode also fell in this skirmish. Then, leaving all hope of the city, the 
1. Red Pamphlet, part II, page 70. 
English ran away to Biau. The Revolutionaries took the treasury, and their unanimously 
elected commander gave presents to the Sepoys in the name of the Emperor of Delhi. The 
houses of the Englishmen were burnt. Then that army composed of thousands of Sepoys 
marched towards Delhi brandishing their arms to the tune of enthusiastic military airs! 
133 
CHAPTER VI RIHILKHAND 
BAREILLY was the capital of the province of Rohilkhand. The English had wrested the 
kingdom away from the Rohilla Pathans who had been ruling the province. There was a 
population there of brave, strong, and spirited Mussulmans, biding their time to take revenge 
for this insult. Rohilkhand and its capital must also be counted among the places where the 
Revolutionary propaganda against English rule was spreading fast about the year 1857. In Bareilly, at this time, were stationed the 8th Irregular Cavalry, and 18th and 68th regiments of 
infantry, and a battery of Indian artillery. Over this force, the chief officer was Brigadier 
Sibbald. About the month of April, some Sepoys had expressed their doubt about the 
cartridges, but the Government did not pay any serious attention to them, and forced the 
Sepoys singly to accept them. Once or twice again there was some tumult and growing 
disaffection among the Sepoys, but the Government could not see its danger. 
The news of the Meerut rising reached Bareilly on the 14th of May. Thereupon, the 
Englishmen sent all their families towards Naini Tal and ordered the cavalry to be in 
readiness. The cavalty was also Indian, but it had the Special and complete confidence of the English. All the Sepoys, including the cavalry, were called on parade on the 15th of May, and 
the chief English officer preached to them loyalty and good behaviour. He said that the new 
cartridges were thenceforth to be stopped, and that the Sepoys should use the old cartridges to 
134 
which they had no objection. Nay more, he said he would himself trample into the dust any 
new cartridges which he saw on the field and thus tried to remove the Sepoy’s fear about the 
cartridges. As a matter of fact, to dilate upon cartridges now was superfluous. The 
Commander-ini-Chief had issued an order that throughout Hindusthan, the new cartridges 
were, thenceforth, to be stopped. When the Government thus drew back immediately after the 
Meerut rising, and stopped, of their own accord, the use of the cartridges upon which they 
insisted so much before the month of May, the people and the Sepoys saw in the new order 
nothing but a sign of fear and weakness. The error of the theory that the Sepoys revolted 
solely on account of the cartridges, was now to be clearly proved at Bareilly. The Grigadier 
told the Sepoys that he would himself smash these cartridges, and tried to reassure them; but 
the days were gone when such words could pacify them. What was the use of giving orders 
about cartridges? Where the question at issue was whether the English should any longer 
have the power of giving any orders whatsoever in the land, to give further orders was to 
inflame the quarrel. To lecture now about good or bad cartridges was an unpardonable 
digression! 
For the people of Rohilkhand had now received an urgent and pressing invitation from the 
Swadeshi throne of Delhi to hold aloft the flag of Indian freedom. Was this invitation one that 
could be lightly treated? 
“From the commander of the army at Delhi to the commander of the army at Bareilly, hearty 
embrances. Brothers, there is a fight with the English proceeding at Delhi. By the grace of 
God, even the first defeat that they have received at our hands has demoralised them more 
than ten defeats would have done them at other times. Innumerable Swadeshi heroes are 
coming to Delhi. At such a time, if you are dining there, come here to wash your hands. The 
Padishah of Shahs and the Home Splendour, our Emperor of Delhi, will give you a great 
welcome and fitly reward your services. Our ears are anxious for the second of your cannon 
and our eyes are thirsting to see you. Come! Come at once! For, Brethren, how will the rose- 
tree flower without spring? How will a child live without milk?” 
Was this an invitation to be rejectede? While the invitation was on its way, Khan Bahadur 
Khan, the descendant of Hafiz Rahmat, the last independent Rohilla chief, was weaving the 
nets of the secret society. Khan Bahadur Khan used to get two pensions from the English, one 
as the descendant of Hafiz Rahmat, and the other as a judicial officer under the English. He 
was known throughout the province as a great favourite of the English. The Government also 
135 
had great confidence in him. And he was the life and centre of all the secret societies of 
Bareilly! But, though this invitation asked the people of Bareilly to come at once, they decided to wait till the 31st of May, in accordance with the plans originally arranged. All the 
Sepoys were doing their duties without, in the least, disobeying the English officers. A few 
days before, a hundred of the revolted Meerut Sepoys came and lived secretly in the “lines” 
themselves, and stirred up the revolutionary spirit by the narrative of the events at Meerut, 
and then left. Still, the Sepoys kept the peace outwardly. The Subahdars of the regiments 
even went so far as to request the Europeans to bring their families! But before this request was fulfilled, a rumour arose on the 29th of May that the Sepoys had taken oath, at the time of 
the morning bath in the river, that they would massacre the English at two o’clock! 
Immediately the English got ready the loyal cavalry regiment. They, also, came together and 
formed without murmur. But the whole day passed and the Sepoys never rose. The English 
retired at night, saying that though the rumour was false, it at least incidentally proved that 
the cavalry could be relief upon. Just then, sure and certain information came that the cavalry 
had sworn, long before, never to lift their swords against their comrades or help the English! The English now could not make up their minds what to believe. Not only the 29th, but also the 30th passed away without any incident. And on the latter day the conduct of the Sepoys 
was so good – if anything, it was more loyal than ever – that the civil and military authorities 
made up their minds that the danger was surely past and that there was no longer any reason 
for fear! 
The 31st of May dawned. Early in the morning, the house of Captain Brownlow was set on 
fire. But the English had not much reason to be particularly fearful of anything serious. The 
day was Sunday. The Sunday military parade passed off smoothly, as well as the reports of 
native officers. The English officers even observed that the Sepoys were more than usually 
quiet that day. The English prayed in their churches. There was not the least sign of trouble 
anywhere. 
The clock struck eleven. A gun was fired among the Sepoy lines. Hardly had the echo died 
out, when a noise of clanging rifles and shrill shouting rent the sky! The rising at Bareilly was 
so carefully planned, that it was arranged beforehand who was to kill which Englishman. As soon as it was eleven, the 68th regiment attacked the Englishmen near their lines. Small 
detachments quickly went to the various bungalows, and the rest attended to the straggling 
Englishmen, to go to their houseds and burn them. On heaving this noise and trumult, the 
terror-stricken Englishmen ran towards the cavalry lines. All the civil and military officers 
136 
had decided to come together there for refuge. As soon as they arrived there, they ordered the 
cavalry regiment to march on the Revolutionaries. But the Indian head of that regiment was 
also a Revolutionary. Mahomed Shafi galloped towards the Revolutionaries and ordered the 
horsemen to follow him. They followed him, shouting, “Die for religion, come, the green flag 
is callling you!” Still the English tried to collect together a few that remained, and attempted 
to come near the parade ground, but finding it impossible to stand before the terrible 
onslaught of the Revolutionaries, they all turned their back and began flying towards Naini 
Tal. Brigadier Sibbald was killed in the first affray. Captain Kirby, Lieutenant Fraser, 
Sergeant Walton, Colonel Troup, Captain Robertson – all the Englishmen that fell into the 
hands of the Revolutionaries were killed. Only thirty-two officers escaped the massacre and 
safely reached Naini Tal. In this way, the English power at Bareilly was made to end in six 
hours! 
When the English flag was hauled down and the flat of freedom began to fly at Bareilly, the 
Subahdar of the Sepoy artillery, Bakht Khan, accepted the commandership of all the Sepoy 
troops. We will hereafter have occasion to refer to him at the time of siege of Delhi. He 
delivered an enthusiastic oration to all the Sepoys as to their conduct after acquiring freedom and their duties in sustainingthe newly established Swaraj.1 And now, this Swadeshi brigadier 
went through the town in the carriage of the English brigadier. Behind him followed the new 
officers seated in the carriages of their English predecessors. Khan Bahadur Khan was 
accepted by acclamation as the ruller of Rohilkhand in the capacity of Subahdar of the 
Emperor. After all the houses of the Engliosh at Bareilly had been burnt down and looted, 
Khan Bahadur Khan ordered the imprisoned Englishmen to be brought before him. Hew had 
acted as judge under the English administration and knew English justice thoroughly. So, he 
appointed a court for the trial of the English criminals. Among them were the Doctor, the 
son-in-law of the Lieutenant-Governor of the North-Western provinces, the principal of the 
Government college at Bareilly, and the District Judge of Bareilly. Only the day before, loyal 
Khan Bahadur Khan had been sitting beside them as a friend. Today, one was on the throne 
and the others in the prisoner’s dock! The jury took their oaths as usual, and took their seats 
on the bench. The prisoners were charged with various crimes involving treason and were all 
sentenced to be hanged, and the six Englishmen were forthwith executed. As the 
Commissioner of Rohilkhand has escaped with his life, Khan Bahadur Khan issued a 
proclamation that the Feringhi commissioner had absconded, and a reward of one thousand 
rupees was offered to anyone who would bring him, dead or alive. After having thus firmly 
cemented his authority with English blood, Khan Bahadur Khan sent word to Delhi that 
137 
Rahilkhand had become free. The Revolution began that morning at eleven, and, before 
sunset, the messenger announcing Rohilkhand’s freedom set out for Dselhi! 
The announcement that the whole of Rohilkhand had become free was not a vain boast. 
While the artillery at Bareilly was shaking the English power to pieces, English blood had 
already begun to flow at Shahjahanpur. This latter town is about forty-sevel miles from Bareilly, and was the headquarters of the 28th infantry. The news of Meerut reached Shahjahanpur on the 15th of May. But since the Sepoys gave no indication whatever of their plans to the authorities, the 31st of May dawned there like other days, in peace and happiness. 
1. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I. 
It being Sunday, the English were in church; but before their prayer was half-finished, the 
Sepoys ran towards the church! When the chaplain came out to see what the matter was, his 
hand was cut off and the massacre began. The city magistrate, Ricketts, fall while running. 
Labadoor was killed in the churth itself. Only one batch of the Sepoys had come to the church 
while the other had been sent to the English cantonment. The latter had already started killing 
and burning. The assistant magistrate ran into the verandah for life, but was killed. Doctor 
Bowling began to address a few words to the Sepoys. The Sepoys, also, were listening to his 
words, but, unfortunately, he called them, in the course of his speech, “seditious.” In reply to 
this “charge,” a bullet came whizzing and he dropped dead. The Revolutionaries who had 
gone to the church had only swords and sticks with them; so, now, they returned to the lines 
to take their rifles. In the meanwhile, some Englishmen, together with the women and 
children, with the help of some Sikh Sepoys and the native cooks and servants, ran to the 
house of a neighbouring Raja for safety. But the Raja explained to them his helplessness and 
asked them to “move on.” The fugitives then went away towards Mahmadi. Thus, before the evening of the 31st of May, Shahjahanpur also became free. 
To the north-west of Bareilly, at a distance of about forty-eight miles, is the district town of Moradabad. Here was stationed the 29th infantry regiment and half a battalion of native 
artillery. A fine opportunity came to test their loyalty, after the news from Meerut had gone there. TheEnglish authorities got information on the 18th of May that some of the Meerut Sepoys had camped near Moradabad. The 29th regiment was ordered to make a night attack 
on them. In obedience of that order, the Sepoys attacked the Meerut Revolutionaries while 
138 
they wee asleep in the woods, but, however, in some ways or other, in spite of the determined 
attack under these conditions, all but one of them succeeded in escaping. The night was so 
dark! The English officers also thought that the darkness helped the Meerut Sepoys to escape, 
though attacked under such odds. It has now transpired, however, that the attack was a mere 
sham; may more, some of the Meerut Sepoys, said to have escaped in the forest, actually 
slept that night in the Sepoy lines at Moradabad! However for the time being the English had entire confidence in the 29th regiment on account of the loyal night-attach which it made. And 
nothing in its conduct was calculated to dispel it till the end of May. 
On the morning of the 31st, however, all the Sepoys began to form on the parade-ground. The 
English were about to ask the reason of their assembling thus without permission, when the 
Sepoys spoke authoritatively in the following manner:- “The rule of the Company is at an 
end! Therefore, you should leave this country immediately and go away, or else you will be 
massacred! If you cannot go at once we will allow you two hours to prepare for departure. 
But you must vacate Moradabad as soon as the two hours are over.” The Moradabad police 
also announced that thenceforth they would not obey the orders of the English, and the 
citizens supported them! When these three simultaneous notices were given, the English 
people at Moradabad – the judge, the collector, the magistrate, the surgeon, and others – with 
their families, ran away from Moradabad without the least attempt at remonstrance. Any 
Englishmen who were found in Moradabad after the time limit had expired were killed. 
Commissioner Powell and others became Mohamedans and thus saved their lives. The 
Sepoys took possession of the treasury and all government property, and before sunset the green flag began to fly on Moradabad.2 
There is also another district town, called Budaun, between Bareilly and Shahjahanpur. Mr. 
Edwardes was then collector and magistrate of the district. Since the English government 
came into Rohilkhand, the oldZemindars were being frightfully oppressed with heavy taxes 
and otherwise. Therefore, the big Zemindars and their tenants were very much disaffected. In 
fact, the land-tax in Budaun was so oppressive, that Edwardes himself knew that Budaun was 
prefectly ready, and only waiting for a chance to drive out the English; and for this reason he 
asked military help from Bareilly. But the situation in Bareilly, as has already been described, 
was not such that help could be sent to Budaun. However, a message from Bareilly came that troops under European officers would be despatched on the 1st of June. At this news Edwardes felt happy and on the 1st of June sat with his eyes towards the road from Bareilly. 
He soon saw a government man coming galloping on towards Budaun. In the hope that he 
139 
would be the forerunner of the succour which he expectred. Edwardes hastily interrogated 
him. But in reply, instead of an assurance of help from Bareilly, he got the message that, at 
Bareilly itself, the English power was at an end! There were Sepoys kept at Budaun to guard 
the treasury, and Edwardes asked their head, “Bareilly was become independent; what about 
Budaun?” The head replied that the Sepoys under him were loyal and that there was no cause 
for anxiety. But in the evening, the town of Baudaun rose in revolt! The Sepoys at the 
treasury, the police, and the leading citizens announced, by beat of drum that the English rule 
was at an end. Thus, the whole district went willingly into the hands of Khan Bahadur Khan. 
2. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny. 
The Sepoys took the treasure and marched towards Delhi and all the English officers at 
Budaun began to run about in the forests at night. Under privations of food and clothing for 
weeks, hiding everywhere, sometimes in the stable of some villager, sometimes in deserted 
houses, English collectors, and magistrates, and English women, were running about to save 
their lives. Some of them were killed, some died, and some lived under the protection of 
kindly “natives!” 
In this manner, the whole province of Rohilkhand rose in a day! In Bareilly, in Shahjahanpur, 
in Moradabad, in Budaun, and other district towns, the military, the police, and the citizens 
issued Proclamations and deported the British Power in the space of a few hours! The English 
power was smashed and the Swadeshi government was put in its stead; British flags were 
torn down, and green flags began to fly in the court-houses and police-stations and offices. 
India assumed the role of ruler and England was put in the prisoner’s dock! This 
extraordinary tranformation took place in a whole province in a few hours! What wonder that 
not a drop of Swadeshi blood was shed in freeing the whole of Rohilkhand? Instead of saying 
“Rohilkhand is dependent”, all said “Rohilkhand is free,” and the thing was done! On one 
day, unanimously, everywhere and at once, the police, the Sepoys, and citizens rose and 
drove away the few English officers in the district towns. No more pains than this were 
required to make the province free! A strong organisation of secret societies, and the swift 
and clever execution of the plan proposed, these were the two things which enabled 
Rohilkhand to free itself from the English and accept the rule of Khan Bahadur Khan. 
140 All the Sepoys went away to Delhi to fight under the leadership of Bakht Khan, trhe head of 
the Bareilly artillery above-mentioned. Then, Khan Bahadur Khan formed a new force to 
keep order in the province and the capital. Almost all citizens were formed into a militia. The 
civil departments were also organised and almost all the previous holders of offices were 
confirmed in their posts. And the chief posts, occupied previously by Europeans, were now 
given to Indians. The government land-tax was assessed in the name of the Emperor of Delhi. 
Courts of justice were opened as before and the former officers were retained. In short, there 
was no break in any department or its work on account of the Revolution, except that instead 
of Englishmen, the chief officers were Indians. Khan Bahadur Khan personally wrote an 
account of the doings in his province to the Emperor, and the following Proclamation was 
posted throughout Rohilkhand. “Residents of Hindusthan! The long-looked-for festival of 
Swaraj has arrived! Are you going to accept or refuse it? Are you going to take advantage of 
this great opportunity or are you going to let it go out of your hands? Hindu and Mahomedan 
Brethren! Be it known to all of you that, if these English are permitted to remain in India, 
they will butcher all and put an end to your religion! The residents of Hindusthan have so 
long been deceived by Englishmen, and have cut their necks with their own swords. So, now 
we must repair this sin of treachery to our country! The Englishmen will try, now also, their 
old work of deception; they will try to incite the Hindus to rise against Mussalmans, and the 
Mahomedans to rise against the Hindus. But, Hindu Brethren! do not fall into their nets. It is 
hardly necessary to tell our clever Hindu brethren that the English never keep their promises. 
They are adepts in the art of trickery and deceitful imposture! They have all along been trying 
to root out all other religions on earth but their own! Have they not pushed aside the rights of 
adopted children? Have they not swallowed up the countries and kingdoms of our Kings! 
Who took away the kingdom of Nagpur? Who took away the kingdom of Lucknow? Who has 
trampled under foot both Hindus and Mahomedans? Mussulmans, if you revere the Koran, 
and Hindus, if you revere the caw-mother, forget now your minor differences and unite 
together in this sacred war! Jump into the battlefield fighting under one banner, and wash 
away the name of the English from India in streams of blood! If the Hindus will join hands 
with the Mahomedans in this war, if they will, also, take the field for the freedom of our 
country, then, as a reward for their patriotism, the killing of cows will be put a stop to. In this 
holy war, he who fights himself, and he who helps another to fight, by means of money, will 
attain earthly and spiritual freedom! But, if anyone will oppose this Swadeshi war, then, he 
will strike at his own head and be guilty of the sin of suicide!” 
141 
Leaving Rohilkhand for the present to make its preparations for defending the Swaraj which 
it has got back, we shall go toBenares and Allahabad to see what is taking place there. 
CHAPTER VII BENARES & ALLAHABAD 
ABOUT four hundred and sixty miles from Calcutta lies the ancient city of Benares, on the 
banks of the sacredGanges, shining in all her historical glory. Benares is surely the queen of 
all the cities that have been built by the sided of the cool, clear, and holy waters of the 
Bhagirathi. The rows of houses mounting higher and higher from the banks of the Ganges, 
the domes of tall temples with golden steeples glittering in the sun, the thick rows of trees 
gracefully raising heads to the sky, the grand harmony of the innumerable bells sounded in 
the temples, and, above all, the sacred temple of Vishweshvarfa, all these give a unique 
splendour to the city of Benares. The pleasure-seekers go there for amusement, the devoted 
for prayer, the Sanyasis for contemplation, and the holy of salvation. All these achieve their 
various purposes in the holy city. For people who are satiated with the pleasures of the world, 
holy Benares is a place of retirement, and for those unfortunates whose hopes and desires of 
happiness in this world are shattered by the jealousy and spite of cruel and wicked men. 
Benares and the sprays of the cool Ganges are a haven of rest. 
142 
Thanks to the English, there was no want of such unfortunate men in 1857 coming to end 
their days of toil in that haven of refuge and peace. Several Hindu and Mahomedan nobles, 
helpless since the palaces of Delhi and Poona and Nagpur etc. were closed to them, and the 
plundered royal families of Sikh and Mahratta princes, were telling their tale of woe in 
Benares in every temple and every Musjid. In this holy city, it is no surprise that the 
degradation of Swadharma and the destruction of Swaraj were being hotly discussed among 
both Hindus of Mahemadans. The military station of the province was Sikroli, which was a short distance from Allahabad. There was the 37th infantry, the Ludhiana Sikh regiment, and 
a cavalry regiment; the artillery was purposely kept in the hands of Englishmen. Among the 
Sepoys, the desire to rise for Swadharma and Swaraj had been secretly fomented by various 
means. As the year 1857 approached, signs were evident that there was a tremendous 
agitation among the populace at Benares. The chief commissioner at the city, Tucker, Judge 
Gubbins, Magistrate Lind, and other civil officers, as well as captain Olpherts, Colonel 
Gorden, and other military officers had from the first taken great precautions for the safety of 
the English at Benares. For, in that city, the popular agitation often outstepped the limits of 
secrecy and sometimes became almost uncontrollable. Purbhayyas openly shouted prayers in the temples, “God, release us from the rule of the Feringhis!”1 Secret societies were formed 
to ascertain the strength of the movement in other places. When the month of May came, 
there was quite a number of Mahomedan preachers in the Sepoy camp, proclamations were affixed to the city walls and public squares asking the people to rise, 2 and at last, things went 
so far, that Hindu priests began holding public prayer-meetings in the temples to pray for the 
destruction of the English and the victory of Swaraj. About the same time, the prices of grains 
went up enormously, and, when English officers went about explaining how, according to the 
laws of political economy, the grain merchants would, in the end, be the losers if prices rose 
any more, people said boldly to their very faces, “It is you who have made everything dear in 
our country; and now you come to lecture to us!” The English were so much terror-struck at 
this ugly manifestation of popular fury, even before the rising, that Captain Olpherts and 
Captain Watson themselves insisted that the English should vacate the place! At last Gubbins 
said, pathetically, “I will go on my knees to you not to leave Benares!” , and the plan of 
evacuation was temporarily postpones! And, indeed, why should it not be so? For have not 
the Sikh nobles established a volunteer corps, now, to protect the English? And has not the 
descendant of Chet Singh whom Warren Hastings trampled down, also joined the English? 
When there is so much “loyalty” yet, there is no reason why the English should leave 
Benares! 
143 
But, while the English of Benares, relying on the strength of this loyalty, had given up the 
idea of leaving Benares, terrible news began to come from the direction of Azimgarh. Azimgarh is situated about sixty miles from Benares, and the 17th native regiment was posted there. In this regiment, a tremendous agitation commenced since the 31st of May, and the 
magistrate, Mr.Horne had been delivering sweet speeches to pacify the Sepoys! But the days were gone when such empty lectures would have pacified soldiers. The 31st of May dawned, 
and the Barracks at Benares were set fire to, the sign for the other Sepoys in the province to rise. So, the rising must take place in the first week of June. To-day is the 3rd of June and a 
good day. For, don’t you see that the treasure of Gorakhpore, together with the treasure of 
Azimgarh – altogether seven lakhs of Rupees – is being sent to Benares? What better 
opportunity can you desire or expect? 
1. Report of the Joint-Magistrate, Mr.Taylor. 
2. Red Pamphlet. The twilight of the 3rd of June was slowly changing to the darnkess of the night at Azimgarh. 
All the English officers of Sepoy regiments were dining together at the club, and the women 
and children were playing and frolicking near by. Immediately the party heard a tremendous 
noise. The English had by the first week of June learnt by heart the meaning of these sudden 
crashes. Even the sudden hush in the midst of their jollity looked like a mutual whisper of 
“The Sepoys have risen!” Just then followed a thundering noise of drums and clarionets! Not 
a moment passed before the white people, with the picture of the Meerut events before their 
mind’s eye, started running for dear life. Officers, women and children despaired of life. But 
theAzimgarh Sepoys, seeing this unfortunate people suffering a worse agony of death, 
relinquished all thought of revenge. They took charge of them in order to protect them from 
being harmed by stray Sepoys, and ordered them to leave Azimgarh at once. But what about some of the over enthusiastic Sepoys who had sworn to shed English blood on that day? 3 
Well then, Lieutenant Hutchinson and Quarter-Sergeant Lewis, at least your bodies must fall 
a prey to our bullets! Enough, let the rest run away alive. If they cannot run, we have no 
objection to their leaving in carriages! But the officers and their wives complained, “Who 
will give us carriages now?” But the Sepoys replied gallantly, “Do not be anxious; we will 
give you carriages.” With such extraordinary magnanimity, the Sepoys brought carriages, 
took away the handcuffs of the English, put them in carriages, and even gave a few Sepoys as 
guard; and thus, the whole caravan, including all the flags and other signs of English rule, 
started forth for Benares! On the other side, the treasure of seven lakhs, the English store of 
144 
ammunition, the prison bearing the stamp of British rule, offices, roads, barracks – all fell 
into the hands of the Sepoys. And who was foremost in all this work? It was the police, the 
police whom the English trusted for information about a possible rising in order to save their 
lives! The police were as well undermined and as harmless on the surface as the Sepoys. 
When the appointed time came, they began by hoisting the flag of Swaraj on the English 
houses and prisons. Some Englishmen who did not find room in the carriages going to 
Benares ran away in the night of Ghazipur. When the sun rose the next day, it gazed in 
admiration at the marvellous transformation that had taken place during its short absence, and 
shone delightfully on the revolutionary flat flying at Azimgarh. The Sepoys, in the flush of 
victory, drew up a great military procession; and, to the strains of martial music and banners 
unfurled marched away to Fyzabad. 
3. Narrative, p.58 
Although the news of the freedom of Azimgarh reached Benares, there were hopes amongst 
the English that Benares at least would be safe. Since the news of the Meerut rising, John 
Lawrence in the Punjab and Lord Canning in Calcutta had been straining every nerve to send 
English troops to the chief centres of the Revolution. Since the northern army was busy in the 
siege of Delhi, there was perfect helplessness in the parts south of Delhi, and English officers 
sent pathetic requests to Calcutta, saying, “For God’s sake, send us Europeans!” We have 
already described how, by this time, Lord Canning had called European troops from Bombay, 
Madras, and Rangoon, and had retained in India the army destined for the now abandoned 
invasion of China. Out of these troops, General Neill, with the Madras fusiliers had, about 
this time, arrives at Benares. The first succour of European troops, and that too under a bold, 
able, and cruel general like Neill, restored the confidence of the English at Benares. Just then, 
the English army at Danapur also came to Benares. As there was extraordinary unrest in 
Benares and there was clear evidence that the Sepoys were also concerned in the 
Revolutionary propaganda, the English thought that they should make an attempt to crush the 
Revolution in its embryo. From the first, the English were confident that this could easily be 
done by the combined strength of General Neill’s troops, the Sikh nobles and soldiers, and theartillery. The news of Azimgarh reached Benares on the 4th June and it was decided after 
considerable discussion that the Sepoys should be disarmed before they rose. Accordingly, a 
general parade was ordered that afternoon. 
145 
Hearing this order, the Sepoys guessed the rest. They also got the secret information that the 
English held the artillery in readiness. When on the parade maidan the Engliosh officers gave 
them the order to lay down their arms, it was clear to them that they would be first disarmed 
and then blown from the mouth of guns. Therefore, instead of laying down their arms, they 
attacked the neighbouring arsenal and fell on the English officers with fierce cries. Just then, 
there arrived on the scene the Sikh regiment intended to overawe them. The Sikhs were at the 
time possessed of such a spirit of loyalty to England, that they fell at the feet of the English 
and prayed to be given a chance of fighting the Sepoys, at least for a short time! A Hindu 
Sepoy attacked their commander Guise and he dropped down dead in an instant. Hardly had 
Brigadier Dodgson arrived to take his place, when a Sikh Sepoy, at the inspiration of the 
moment, shot him! But the other Sikhs, unable to forgive this great crime, hacked him to 
pieces! The Sikhs were waiting for the reward of this loyal deed, when the English artillery 
opened fire on them all! Seeing the confusion going on between the Hindu and the Sikh 
Sepoys, the English authorities must have suspected that the Sikh regiment also had deserted 
them. On account of this misunderstanding, they opened fire on all indiscriminately. Now the 
unfortunate Sikhs had no otherway left but to join the Revolutionaries! All the Indians, 
together, attacked the artillery thrice. This was about the only prominent occasion in the 
history of 1857 when Hindus, Mahomedans, and Sikhs, unitedly fell upon the English! But, at 
that very moment, the Sikhs were making extraordinary efforts to expiate this sin! While the 
battle between the English and the Sepoys was raging near the barracks, there was a fear that 
the townsmen would also rise. In this fear, English officers, women, and children were 
running about in the streets. Then the Sikh Sirdar, Surat Singh, rushed forward to protect 
them. The treasury at Benares, besides containing lakhs of Rupees, also contained the most 
valuable ornaments wrested by the English from the last Sikh Queen. And this treasury was 
guarded by the Sikhs! It was here impossible that the Sikhs would not entertain the idea of 
taking hold of the treasury and taking back the ornaments belonging to their Qaueen who had 
been deported by the English. But their leader, the loyal Surat Singh, came forward and 
arranged that his co-religionists should not touch any of them! And, soon, the treasure was 
transferred to the guard of English soldiers. At this time, a Pundit, called Gokul Chand, had 
also joined the side of the English. Even the Raja of Benares placed his all – his influence, his 
wealth, and his power – his everything at the feet of his lord – not Kashi Vishweshwara, but – 
the English! The Sepoys alone did not surrender in spite of the hot fire, but retired fighting 
out of the field and spread all over the province. 
146 
No doubt, the English, following John Lawrence’s plan in the Panjab, crushed the Benares 
rising in embryo; but the news that Benares had risen spread with lightning rapidity all over 
Northern India, and the different Revolutionary centres, which were waiting with their eyes directed towards Benares, began a series of risings. Javanpur rose on the 5th of June. When 
the news arrived at Javanpur that the Sepoys from Benares were coming there in all haste, the 
English officers began to deliver lectures on loyalty to the Sikh Sepoys stationed there. But 
these lectures had hardly ended when the tramp of Benares Sepoys was heard rapidly 
approaching! The few Sikh Sepoys at Javanpur who belonged to the Sikh regiment at Benares 
at once joined the Revolutionaries, and the whole was ablaze in the flames of the Revolution. 
Seeing this, we joint magistrate, Cuppage, again stood up to lecture, but, from the audience, 
came a whizzing bullet instead of applause, and the magistrate sahib fell down dead! 
Commanding officer Lieutenant Mara also fell shot by a bullet. After this, the 
Revolutionaries attacked the treasury and ordered all the English to clear out the Javanpur. 
Now, the Benares cavalry too entered the town. They had taken terrible oaths to kill every 
Englishman they met. Seeing an old deputy collector running, the Sowars ran after him. 
Some Javanpur men tried to mediate, “Give the poor man his life, he has treated us very 
kindly.” But the Sepoys replied. “Can’t help it; he is an Englishman and must die.!”4 
Even in times of such excessive hatred, the Revolutionaries gave permission to Englishmen 
who surrendered, to lay down their arms and run away quietly. Makiong use of this 
permission, most of the Englishmen vacated Javanpur and departed in a short time. They 
hired boats on the banks of the Ganges to go to Benares. But, when in the middle of the 
stream, the boatmen looted them and left them on the sands! There, at Javanpur, the whole 
town came out, looted and burnt English houses, and mixed into dust all the signs of their 
power. The Sepoys took as much treasure as they could carry and marched towards Aydhya. 
Then, the old women of the town and paupers who had never had a Rupee in their lives, were 
placed in charge of the remaining treasure. They helped themselves with it plentifully, and 
showered blessings heartily on Swaraj and the Revolution! 
In this way rose Azimgarh on the 3rd of June, Benares on the 4th, and Javanpur on the 5th. The 
whole province of Benares was in flames. If the chief town of a province falls to the enemy, 
the Revolution, as a rule, loses strength in that province. For the whole province to depend on 
the capital in times of Revolution is regarded as a most dangerous fault in Revolutionary 
tactics. Mazzini says, ‘Wherever our flag flies, that is our capital.” The capital must follow 
the Revolution and not vice versa. However, accurately the map of a Revolution might have 
147 
been drawn in the beginning, it is impossible that events will happen in a settled order during 
its course; therefore, though it fails in the capital, the province must never give it up. 
Undoubtedly, Benares gave a very good illustration of this principle. For though the capital of 
the province, the city of Benares, fell into the grip of the English, in the province itself, the 
cyclone of the Revolution arose at once and enshrouded the whole admosphere. Zemindars, 
peasants, Sepoys, - all began to consider English rule as unholy as cow’s flesh! Even small 
villages, if they heard that an Englishman was within their boundaries, would beat and drive 
4. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 245. 
him out!5 Especially the people were so disgusted not only with Englishmen but with 
everything they had done, that they could not bear to see anything connected with the English 
before their eyes! They drove away Zemindars appointed by the English – good or bad – and 
put the old hereditary Zemindars instead. In one week disappeared, completely, English 
methods of taxation their prisons, and their courts of ‘justice’! The telegraph lines were cut 
off; the railway lines were dug up; behind every hillock and every bush were hidden villagers 
thirsting for English blood and money; and most of all, in village boundaries, warders were 
parading so that the English should get not only no provisions but not even any information! 
In these circumstances, the mistery of the English knew no bounds! And still, the city of 
Benares had been frustrated in its attempt at freedom, and the Sepoys who rose had marched to Oudh! When the attempt of the 4th of June at Benares failed and wholesale arrests followed, an important fact came to light.6 Only from such incidental events it is possible to 
understand how the machinery of the Secret Organisation had been worked. Three of the 
most active agitators and a millionaire banker were arrested at Benares. When their houses 
were searched, some very violent letters written in cipher and received from the chief centre 
of the Revolutionary organisation, fell into the hands of the Government. The most important 
of these letters came from “a head leader”. Their substance was as follows:- “The Benares 
citizens should rise at once. Kill Gubbins, Lind, and other Englishmen. The money for this 
work will be given by the banker.....” When the house of this banker was searched, a store 
of 200 swords and rifles was discovered! 
148 
5. At every successive stage of this military revolt, the fact of a deep-seated and 
widespread feeling of hatred and an unappeasable revengefulness for an assumed wrong is 
more plainly developed. The desire for plunder was only a secondary influence in producing 
the calamities to which the European residents of various places were exposed.” – Charles 
Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 245. 
6. “No sooner had it been known in the districts that there had been an insurrection at 
Benares, than the whole country rose like one man. Communications were cut off with the 
neighbouring stations and it appeared as if the Ryots and the Zemindars were about to 
attempt the execution of the project which the Sepoys failed to accomplish in Benares.” – Red 
Pamphlet, page 91. 
This is a short account of the rising of the province of Benares. Here the people never 
massacred Englishmen as at Meerut or Delhi. In the whole province not a single English 
woman was killed. May more, when national anger in the heart was demanding “Revenge!”, 
the people cordially bid farewell to the English there, themselves assisting sometimes to yoke 
the animals to their carriages. Look on this picture and on that which will now follow! 
We do not say that the English should have sympathised with Benares in its attempts to attain 
Swaraj. But we do maintain that the English could never be justified in the atrocities that they 
committed in the Benares province, so totally incommensurable with the provocation they 
received either from the Sepoys or the people in that province. The English have never spread 
to hurl the most vile and lying abuses on the heads of the Revolutionaries, and hence, on all 
Indians, for their “cruelties.” Now, when we shall have described below how a brave 
commander of the “civilised” English army treated the people in the Benares, and when it is 
said that all the facts that we shall give are from the accounts of the English themselves, it 
will be superfluous and unnecessary to add anything to it. Let the imperial world judge for 
itself. After the Benares rising, General Neill organised detachments of the English and Sikhs 
to keep ‘order’ in the neighbouring villages. These bands used to enter villages occupied by 
defenceless peasants. Anybody whom they met was either cut down or hanged. The supply of 
those to be hanged was so great that one scaffold was soon found to be insufficient, even 
though worked day and night; therefore, a long line of permanent scaffolds was erected. 
149 
Though, on this long range, people were half killed and thrown away, still, there was a crowd 
of waiting candidates! The English officers gave up as hopeless the silly idea of cutting down 
trees and erecting scaffolds; so, thenceforth, the trees themselves were turned into scaffolds. 
But if only one man were to be hanged on each three, what has God given so many branches 
to a tree for? So, “natives” were left hanging on every branch, with their necks tightly roped 
to them. This “military duty” and this Christian mission went on incessantly night and day. 
No wonder the brave English got tired of it. So the necessary seriousness in this religious and 
nobe duty was mixed with a little humour for the sake of amusement. The rude manner of 
catching hold of peasants and hanging them on the trees was altered to suit the taste of art. 
They were first made to mount on elephants. Then the elephants were taken near a high branch, and after the necks were tied tightly to it, the elephants would be moved away.7 Still, 
when the elephants were gone, the countless unshapely corpses used to hang on the branches 
7. Narrative, page 69. 
And the English passers-by were bored with the unchanging monotony of being hanged 
straight, they were made into all sorts of figures. Some were killed in the shape of the English figure “8”, and some in the shape of “9”!8 
But in spite of these various efforts in different directions, there were still hundreds of 
thousands of ‘black’ men living! Now, to hang all these would require an amount of rope that 
could not easily be had! The “civilised” and “Christian” nation of England was landed in this 
unthought-of difficulty. By the grace of their God Himself, they hit upon a new plan, and the 
first experiment was so successful that, thenceforth, hanging was abandoned for the new and 
scientific method. Village after village could thus be razed to the ground! After setting 
villages on fire, and keeping the guns in position to overawe them, how long will it take to 
burn thousands of natives? This setting fire to villages on all sides and burning the 
inhabitants, was so amusing to many Englishmen that they sent letters to England giving a 
humorous description of these scenes. The fires were so quickly and skilfully lighted that no 
villager had any chance of escape at all! Poor peasants, learned Brahmins, harmless 
Mussalmans, school children, women with infants in their arms, young girls, old men, blind 
and lame, all were burnt in the mass of flames! Mothers with suckling babes also succumbed 
to these fires! Old men and women, and those unable to move away even a step from the fire, were burnt in teir beds!9 And if a solitary man were to escape the fire, what then? One 
150 Englishman says in his letter, “We set sire to a large village which was full of them. We surrounded them, and when they came rushing out of the flames, we shot them!”10 
And was it only a solitary village that was thus treated? The English sent various detachments 
to the various parts of the province to burn villages. Out of the many batches, one officer, out 
of the many officers of a batch, says of one of his many outings, “You will, however, be 
gratified to lean that twenty villages were razed to the ground!” 
8. “Volunteer hanging parties went out into the districts and amateur executions were 
not wanting to the occasion. One gentleman boasted of the numbers he had finished off quite 
“in an artistic manner”, with mango trees for gibbets and elephants as drops, the victims of 
this wild justice being strung up, as though for pastime, in “the form of a figure of eight”. – 
Kaye and Malleson’s History of the Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 177. 
9. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, pp. 243-244. 
10. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, pp. 243,244. 
And all this account is only a summary of what has accidentally appeared in the works of 
English historians, who openly swear, “it is better not to write anything about General Neill’s 
revenge!” 
Enough! To add even a word more of our own to it, is to spoil this naked picture of the 
inhuman barbarity of the English! 
And, therefore, you terror-struck eyes, look now towards the love-waves of the happy union 
of the Bhagirathi and the Kalindi rivers. The city of Allahabad, eternally laved by the calm, 
noble, and graceful waters at the union (Sanhama), is situated about seventy miles from 
Benares. To the holy purity of the Prayaga-Kshetra, the vast fort built under the reign of 
Akbar, gave an additional beauty. Allahabad is the key to all the important roads leading 
from Calcutta towards the Punjab and Delhi. Here, the fort of Allahabad has the imperial 
grace of a tall, strong, and great commander appointed to guard over the movements of these 
provinces. In the Revolution of 1857, he who held this fort held the key to the whole 
province. Such being the case, both sides made extraordinary efforts to acquire or retain the 
command of this most important fort. The plan of the Revolutionary party was that the 
151 
Sepoys as well as all the citizens of Allahabad should rise simultaneously. While the secret 
organisation was working up towards this goal, the Prayaga Brahmins had been of the 
greatest use in inspiring into the cities the ideals of Swaraj. These influential Hindu priests 
had been long sowing the seeds of the Revolutionary War, not only among the citizens of 
Allahabad, but also among the Hindu population in the whole province. With the traditional 
Hindu prayer at the time of the bath, was couples the holy and religious prayers of the 
Revolution. Also, among the vast Mussalma population of the town, the Mullahs were very 
busy. Thousands of Mussalmans were only awaiting the signal with a firm determination to 
offer their blood on the battle-field in the cause of country and religion. The English, at the 
time, quite expected this. They seem to have been firmly convinced that all Mussalmans were 
their mortal enemies. The well-known writer of the Red Pamphlet says, “The Mahomedans 
too, have shown that they cherish in their hearts the proselytising doctrines of their religion 
and that, as Christians, they will ever detest and take advantage of every opportunity of 
destroying Feringhis.” True as this is in general, it was more true still in this city. At 
Allahabad, the Moslems were more advanced than the Hindus. They were most prominent in 
the management of the machinery of the secret society. The efforts of Hindus and 
Mahomedans for the freedom of their country became, at last, so great that the very judges and Munsiffs of the Government joined the secret society!11 
Allahabat being the chief station of the province, the English should have taken extraordinary 
precautions to guard the fort. But, on account of the ignorance till the beginning of May about 
the internal agitation in the whole country, the military preparations at Allahabad had been 
very bad. At Allahabad itself, the men who were spreading all around the fire of Revolution 
had kept such skilful secrecy that the Government did not think it necessary even to keep a 
single English soldier there! When the news from Meerut came, this important station had only the 6th Sepoy regiment and about two hundred men of a Sikh regiment from Ferozepur. 
Soon after, the Oudh cavalry was brought there, and the forst, together with the vast store of 
arms and ammunition, was kept entirely in the hands of the Sepoys. The English officers at 
the head of these Sepoys were strong in the belief that their Sepoys were very loyal. Especially the 6th regiment was undoubtedly the first in loyalty! One day, after hearing the 
news of Delhi, they sent word to their officers, “Khavind, give us the order to go to Delhi and 
cut those mutineers to pieces. We are anxiously waiting.” This extraordinary symptom of 
loyalty was admired everywhere. From the Governor-General himself came the order to give public thanks to the 6th regiment, “for this unparalleled faithfulness and loyalty.” Just then a citizen brought the information that the 6th regiment was secretly hand in glove with the 
152 
Revolutionaries! Seeing this, the 6th regiment caught two revolutionary preachers and handed 
them over to the officers as a tangible proof of their loyalty. Now, why base suspicions? But, 
if the Government still suspects our loyalty, then the officers should come amongst us and see for themselves how pure our hearts are! The English officers came on the 6th of June into the 
lines and saw that their heart was indeed full to the brim with loyalty everywhere. Nay, some 
of the Sepoys actually ran up to the officers, embraced them heartily, and affectionately kissed them on both cheeks.12 
And the same night, everyone of the Sepoys of the 6th regiment rushed out, sword in hand, 
shouting “Maro Feringhiko!” (Kill the Feringhis!). 
While the Sepoys were moving heaven and earth in order that their plans might not be 
frustrated and they themselves might not be disarmed as at Benares, the English were 
11. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 268 
12. Narrative. 
removing their families into the fort for protection under the charge of the Sikhs and the cavalty. The news from Benares came to Allahabad on the 5th. On that day, there was so 
much agitation in the town that the English pointed some guns in the direction of the bridge 
towards the Benares side and closed the castle-gates. At night, the English officers whom the 
Sepoys had only then affectionately kissed had assembled at the mess for dinner, when at a 
distance the terrible bugle began to blow! The sounds of the bugle, as it were, conveyed the information that the loyal 6th regiment had also risen! 
That evening, the order had been given to the Sepoys to take the guns which were on the 
Benares bridge into the fort. But it seemed that the hitherto traditional loyal practice of 
obeying all the orders of the English was suddenly discontinued that evening; for, the Sepoys 
themselves issued an order that the guns shall be taken not to the fort but to the cantonment! 
The officers called the Oudh cavalry to punish the Sepoys for this extraordinary 
disobedience. The young and promising officers, Lieutenant Alexander and Lieutenant 
Harvard, got the cavalry in order and marched on the Sepoys. At this time the morning was 
just rising. When the cavalry was brought face to face with the insolent Sepoys, the English 
officers gave the order to attack and rushed boldly forward, hoping that thousands of horses 
would gallop behind them and trample down the handful of Sepoys. But, behold! the cavalry 
refused to draw their swords against their own countrymen and did not move! At this, the 
153 
Sepoys raised a tremendous shout of applause. Lieutenant Alexander was hit in the chest and 
fell down, his body was cut to pieces, and then all the Indian Sepoys embraced each other and 
marched to the camp. Two horsemen had already galloped to the camp and given the news to 
their brethren in the camp. The scene that followed on the parade ground was unparalleled! 
Whenefver an English officer gave a word of command, whiz came a bullet! Plunkett, 
Adjutant Steward, Quarter-Master Hawes, Pringle, Munro, Birch, Lieutenant Innes, - all fell 
down dead! The excited mass of humanity on the parade ground was now going about setting 
fire to the houses of Englishmen. When they heard that there were many Englishmen at the 
mess-house, an attack was made and every Englishman there was killed! It has been already 
said that the most important thing in Allahabad was the possession of the fort. In it were the 
English women and children and a vast store of ammunition, and it was entirely in the hands 
of the Sikhs. All the Sepoys were now waiting for the firing of the gun, the settled sign that 
the Sikhs and the few Sepoys with them had also risen and driven out the English. 
But within the fort, the Sikhs showed their true treachery! They not only refused to take away 
the English flag from the fort but helped the English officers to disarm and drive out the few 
Sepoys that had found their way inside. The English express even now a sense of 
astonishment as to how the Sikhs stuck to them at that juncture. In half an hour, the extensive 
fort of Allahabad would have fallen into the hands of the Revolutionaries. That, is to say, in 
half an hour, the backbone of English rule would have been smashed! But the Sikhs spent 
that half an hour in hacking their own countrymen and their mother country! Though the 
Sepoys in the fort rose again and again, the Sikhs instead of joining them, disarmed them and 
drove them out at the orders of the English. And thus, the fort continued to be in English 
hands. 
But Allahabad did not fortunately consist of these four hundred Sikh traitors alone! As the 
time for the Sepoy rising in the fort approached, the city of Allahabad rose also. The terrible 
shouts on the parade-ground were echoed from the town itself. At first, the houses of 
Englishmen were destroyed; then, Sepoys and the people together broke the prison. No hearts 
could be more full to hatred against the English than those of the hundreds of prisoners there. 
So, as soon as they were released, they shouted hoarse cries and ran first to the quarters 
where the English resided! The Revolutionaries had a special eye on railways and telegraphs! 
The railway officers, the lines, the telegraph poles and wires, engines, were all crushed to 
pieces! In spite of all the precautions taken by the English, some Englishmen fell into the 
hands of the Revolutionaries. They despatched them quickly! Then, the half Feringhis, who, 
154 
relying on the protection of the English, used to treat the “natives” with insolence, came in 
for their turn. Those who had been against the Revolution had their houses attacked. The 
lives of only those were saved who took oaths, “We will fight against the English!” On the morning of the 17th, the Revolutionaries captured the treasury containing nearly thirty lakhs 
of Rupees. Then, in the afternoon, a great Revolutionary flat was taken in procession and 
hoisted on the police station. And while the town and the fort were thus involved in the 
flames of Revolution, all the Sepoys and the citizens saluted it! 
Almost at the same moment, the whole province of Allahabad rose like one man! 
Everywhere, things were altered so quickly that, after a short time, no one would have 
believed that the English had ever been ruling there! In every village the embroidered flag 
was hoisted and a stray Englishman was beaten away or killed and the roots of English rule 
were, as it were, uprooted! Oh, how superficial really are the roots of slavery in spite of the 
centuries of efforts made to drive them in! And, especially, an unnatural seed like that of 
slavery, how can it take root? 
Most of the Talukdars in the Allahabad province were Mahomedans and their tenants were 
Hindus. Thus, the English had considered it impossible that these two would unite and that 
the whole mass of the people would rise against them. But, in this memorable first week of 
June, how many of such impossibilities were realised! Without even waiting to hear about the 
rising of the city of Allahabad, all the villages of the province rose simultaneously and 
declared their indedpendence! Hindus and Mahomedans, because they fed on the same 
Mother’s milk, rose together to strike blows at English rule! Not only the able-bodied Sepoys, 
but also old military pensioners enrolled themselves as national volunteers. Twisting their 
moustaches, they would organised bands. Those who were too weak and old to do anything 
themselves would explain to younger men important points in military strategy and give 
advice on knotty points of tactics. Can we wonder that the noble ideals of Swadharma and 
Swaraj which thrilled youth even in superannuated Sepoys had thoroughly permeated all classes of the population?13 Shopkeepers, Marwaris, and Banias, even, took such an 
important part in that popular agitation that General Neill in his report makes a special 
reference to their hatred of the English! “The majority of the chief merchants and others have 
shown the worst spirit towards us. Many of them have taken active part against us.” But, even 
after this, the English were boasting that the peasants would take their side. But Allahabad 
shattered this vain delusion to pieces! The peasants took a leading part in the Revolutionary 
War of 1857, as, perhaps, they never had done in any political agitation before. Under the 
155 
banner of their old Talukdars – not the new ones appointed by the English – the peasants 
threw their ploughs and ran with lightning speed to join the war for freedom. They had 
compared the English Company with their old kings; and they were firmly convinced that 
their own Swaraj was a thousand times better than the Feringhi Company’s rule. Therefore, 
when the hour of consummation arrived, they began the work of revenge for the wrongs of 
decades. Everywhere, Swaraj was hailed with shouts of delight and even the children in the 
streets began to spit on slavery! It is true; even children spat, for children of twelve or 
13. “And with them went on not only the Sepoys who, a day before, had licked our 
hands, but the superannuated pensioners of the Company’s native army who though feeble 
for action, were earnest in their efforts to stimulate others to deeds of cowardice any cruelty.” 
– Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 193. 
See also Red Pamphlet. 
fourteen would organise processions in the streets with the Revolutionary flat. The English 
arrested such a procession and sentensed the little boys to death! Hearing this setnence, an 
English officer felt so ashamed that, with tears in his eyes, he came to the chief commandant 
and requested him to release the children. But it was of no use! And the children who 
committed the crime of raising the flag of independence were all publicly hanged! Will not 
the murder of these little angels fall back on the head of the assassins? The whole province 
shook with tremor; peasants and Talukdars, old and young, men and women, all arose with 
the cry, “Har, Har,” to smite the chains of political slavery. “For not only in the districts 
beyond the Ganges but in those lying between the two rivers, the rural population had risen .... and, soon, there was scarcely a man of either faith who was not arraigned against us.”14 
And, for the success of these huge efforts of the whole populace and for the freedom of the 
Motherland, the Prayaga Brahmins and Mullahs began to send forth prayers unto Heaven! 
It is difficult to find in Indian history another Revolution, so exciting, so quick, so terrible, 
and so universal! It was almost an unheard to thing in India that the powers of the people 
should awaken with a start and begin to shed pools of blood for the freedom of the country, 
even as thundering clouds shed rain. Besides, the sight of Hindus and Mahomedans fighting 
side by side for Hindusthan realizing their true interests and natural comradeship, was truly 
magnificent and inspiting. After having set up such a terrible whirlwind, shall we wonder that 
156 
Hindusthan could not firmly keep it under control? The wonder is that Hindusthan could raise 
such a whirlwind at all. For, no nation has been able to control a Revolution suddenly. If we 
compare the Rising with the French Revolution, we will find that the inevitable incidents of 
any Revolution – like anarchy, confusion, outrage, selfishness, and looting, were not fewer 
there than in India. This was a vast experiment made by India. So we need not be surprised if, 
in the province of Allahabad where the experiment was so successful, there were, also, some 
mistakes and confusion. The hereditary feuds of Zemindars, the excessive poverty – the 
corollary of long slavery, and the enmity of centuries between Hindus and Mahomedans and 
the natural occasional misunderstandings during the efforts to extinguish it, all these made it 
impossible that there should not be anarchy for some time, when the first shock of the Rising 
was sensibly felt. After the Creation, there comes often the Deluge. Whoever wants a 
Revolution must be prepared to meet these difficulties in carrying it out! 
14. Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 195. 
However, when the week of looting and burning was over, all the dangers of anarchy melted 
away and the Revolution assumed some organised form in Allahabad. In that province, as in 
all placed where a Revolution due to popular agitation takes place, the difficulty after the 
rising is that of finding capable leaders. This difficulty was soon got over in the city of 
Allahabad; for, an ardent lover of liberty, called Leakat Ali, soon became the leader of the 
Revolution. The only information we have about this extraordinary man is that he was a 
religious preacher among the weavers. Before the Rising, he had worked as a teacher in a 
school. He was adored by all people for the holy purity of his life. When the province of 
Allahabad became free, the Zemindars of the Chauvis Parganas brought this Moulvie in a few 
days to Allahabad and appointed him chief officer there. And he was proclaimed in great 
ceremony as the representative of the Emperor of Delhi. This Moulvie established his head- 
quarters in a fortified garden called Khusru Bagh and began the work of organising the 
Revolutionaries in the province. He soon put all the affairs of state in good order. He did not 
stop with merely saying that he was the Subahdar of the Emperor but he continued to send, to 
the last, reports of the events in Allahabad to the Emperor of Delhi. 
The first thing that Moulvie Leakat Ali had to do was to capture the fort of Allahabad. He had 
begun the attempts to organise and prepare the army that collected under him and direct an 
attack on the fort, when the news came that General Neill was marching from Benaras 
157 
towards Allahabad. Even now, if the four hundred Sikhs in the fort had come to their senses, 
the whole fort, together with the guns, arms, and ammunition, would have fallen to the 
Revolutionaries without a shot being fired! General Neill was so afraid of this that he marched with his English tropps in haste to Allahabad. Heill arrived there on the 11th of June. 
He had no hope that the Sikhs would protect the fort and its English occupants till his arrival. 
He was, therefore, overjoyed when he saw the English flat still flying on the walls of the fort. 
He, immediately, kept the English soldiers to garrison the fort and sent the loyal Sikhs out to 
dothe fighting. It is clearly seen from this how little faith Neill had in the Sikh Sepoys. 
Though Neill had no faith in the Sikhs, the Sikhs had complete faith in him; for, they refused 
to join the Revolutionaries even after this insult, and consented to burn the neighbouring villages. On the 17th of June, the English army began to push its way into the town. 
Describing the incidents, the Moulvie, in his report to the Emperor, says, “Of the traitorous 
sinners who have joined the enemy, some have spread the rumour that the English are going 
to blow up the whole town. The people have left their homes and have announced that they 
are going away in order to save their lives! Therefore, the whole town is being deserted in 
spite of assurances of protection.” As this unfortunate report of the Moulview had set out on 
its way to Delhi, the English attack on Khusru Bagh began. The Revolutionaries defended the 
place that day; but the Moulview soon saw that it was madness to attempt to hold Allahabad 
from a dilapidated garden while the fort was in the hands of the enemy. So, on the night of the 17th, he left for Cawnpore with all his followers. The next day, on the 18th, the English re- 
entered Allahabad together with the ‘loyal Sikhs’. 
Though Allahabad followed the example of Benares and fell into the English hands, the 
Revolutionaries did not lose courage at all. Seeing the enemy thus safely protected in the 
chief forts, the people of the province were all the more enraged and every village put up 
entrenchments and prepared to make a stand. The days were gone when such determined 
people could be seduced by bribery. The was was a war of principle, and though Neill offered 
rewards of thousands of Rupees for the heads of even minor leaders, the penurious peasants 
themselves were unwilling to help him. An English officer of the time has expressed his 
surprise at this noble stand for the sake of principle. He writes of one village: “The magistrate 
offered a reward of one thousand rupees for the head or the person of the leader of rebels who 
is well-known to the natives; yet, such is their hatred towards us that no one would give him up!15 Let alone betraying the leaders, it was considered, at that time, a great sin even to sell 
for money any commodity to the English. If anyone did commit that offence, he was 
immediately given a harsh punishment by the community. “Any one who had worked for the 
158 
Europeans, these murderers killed. So, if the population is to a man against us, we should 
stand but a bad chance. A poor baker was found with his hand cut off and his nose slit, because he had sent in bread to us.” This is the report of the 23rd of June. Simply because the 
baker gave bread to the English, the villagers cut off his hands and nose. When this national 
and armed boycott was proclaimed, the misery of the Feringhis knew no bounds. It is true 
they had taken the fort of Allahabad. But, they found it impossible to move even a step one 
way or the other. They could get neither oxen, nor carts, nor even medicine! No dolies for 
sick soldiers and no men to lift them! There were sick men lying about in various places. 
Their shrill cries were so fearful that some English women died by hearing them. The days 
were hot. And the trick of the Revolutionaries in rising in June, so that the Englishmen might 
die of heat also, now came to be understood. All Englishmen were busy bathing their heads in 
15. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I. 
cold water! Besides, the provisions always fell short. Nobody could be found who would sell 
even a grain of corn to the English. “Up to to-day, we have had little to eat; indeed, I could 
not have fed a dog with my yesterday’s breakfast!” So writes an officer from Allahabad! This 
heat and this starvation brought on cholera in the English camp. To add to the troubles, 
English soldiers regularly started getting drunk! All discipline was gone.These drunkards 
began to disobey Neill’s orders to such an extent that he wrote to Canning that he had 
decided to hand a few of them! The Englisharmy, beset with these numerous difficulties, was 
chained to Allahabad city. Though urgent messages requesting help were coming frequently 
from the English of Cawnpore, a dashing warrior like General Neill, had to see the first of 
July dawn in Allahabad itself! 
It is important to note that General Neill and his fusiliers had been brought from Madras. If, 
at this time, there has been even a slight tremor of a Revolution towards Madras, the English 
would have been unable to bear the strain even for a day. For, though the resolute Indians of 
Allahabad had all but succeeded in the cleverly organised plan of shutting up English soldiers 
in the forts, the English had no real reason to be disheartened. For Madras, Bombay, 
Rajputana, the Punjab, Nepal, and other parts were still lying like dead weights hampering 
the national movement. When some of these parts did begin to move, they fell on their own 
countrymen, like demons. Were not thousands of Sikh Sepoys ready to help the English in 
159 
Benares itself? However, whatever the others might do, the Brahmin priests and Mullahs of 
Prayag, Talukdars and peasants, teachers and students, shopkeepers and customers – in spite 
of various difficulties, in spite of the want of a great military leader who could lead them to 
battle, in spite of defeat, discouragement, and anarchy – showed a confirmed and inveterate 
hatred of slavery. Of the great sacrifices, including the sacrifice of life itself, made by these 
noble patriots for the lofty ideals of Swaraj and freedom. History will ever be proud! 
For, all these patriots were actually paying a very heavy price for rising against English 
slavery. It is difficult to find a parallel, even in the history of savages, to the cruel brutality 
which Neill showed in the provinces of Benares and Allahabad! We do not write this as a 
figure of speech; any one will be convinced that what we have said is nothing but the bare 
truth, if he reads the accounts given by the English themselves. We had given some account 
of the inhuman conduct of the British in Benares. Here, we extract a letter of a brave and 
generous Briton to describe his achievements in Allahabad. “One trip I enjoyed amazingly; 
we got on board a steamer with a gun, while the Sikhs and the fusiliers marched up to the 
city. We steamed upthrowing shots right and left till we got up to the bad places, when we 
went on the shore and peppered away with our guns, my old double-barrel bringing down 
several niggers. So thirsty for vengeance I was. We fired the places rightand left and the 
flames shot up to the heavens as they spread, fanned by the breeze, showing that the day of 
vengeance had fallen on the treacherous villains. Every day, we had expeditions to burn and 
destroy disaffected villages and we have taken our revenge. I have been appointed the chief 
of a commission for the trial of all natives charged with offences against the government and 
persons. Day by day, we have strung up eight and the men. We have the power of life in our 
hands and, I assure you, we spare not. A very summary trial is all that takes place. The 
condemned culprit is placed under a tree, with a rope round his neck, on the top of a carriage, and when it is pulled off he swings.”16 Neill burnt old men; Neill burnt middle-aged men; 
Neill burnt young men; Neill burnt children; Neill burnt infants; Neill burnt babies in cradles; 
and Neill has burnt babies suckling at the breasts of their mothers! Kaye admits that six 
thousand Indians were done to death at the place above mentioned! Hundreds of women, 
young girls, mothers, and daughters have been burnt alive by Neill, without even counting 
their number. We make the statement in the presence of God and in the presence of all 
humanity! If anyone has the slightest proof against it, let him come forth boldly and stand for 
a moment at least before the world and God! 
160 And what was the crime all these had committed? The crime was that they were ready to bear 
all these for the sake of their country’s freedom! 
Still the massacre of Cawnpore has to come! Neill’s barbarities were not a revenge of 
Cawnpore, but the Cawnpore bloodshed was the result of and revenge for Neill’s inhuman 
brutalities! 
Neill has killed as many people in Allahabad alone as all Englishmen, women and children 
who had been killed throughout India in the Revolution, put together! And tens of such Neills 
were conducting such massacres in hundreds of places! For every Englishman, a whole 
village has been burnt! God will not forget this and we will, also, never forget this! 
And what do English historians saya bout this? They generally omit this, and that too, 
ostentatiously! If they do give some of the details, it is to prove how bold and brave Neill 
16. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 257. 
was. What greater mercifulness than such timely cruelty? Some say that this cruelty on his 
part shows the great love of humanity in Neill’s heart! Kaye, no doubt, suspects that the 
Cawnpore massacres were a result of this barbarous revenge; but, he says, it is natural that the 
leonine qualities of the British people should come out on account of the insolence of the 
‘natives’. Kaye does not write a single word against Neill for this cruelty. But, instead of 
allowing man to discuss this question, he leaves it to God! When talking of Nana Sahib, his 
pen puts even Obscenity to shame! Charles Ball praises Neill inordinately. But what does 
Neill himself say? 
He says, “God grant I may have acted with justice! I know I have acted with severity but, 
under all the circumstances, I trust for forgiveness. I have done all for the good of my 
country, to re-establish its prestige and power, and to put down this most barbarous, inhuman 
insurrection.” The definition of Patriotism in England is unique indeed! 
Another historian, Holmes, says: “Old men had done us no harm; helpless women, with 
suckling infants at their breasts, felt the weight of our vengeance no less than the vilest 
malefactors. But, to the honour of Neill, let it be remembered that, to him, the infliction of punishment was not a delight but an awful duty.”17 
161 
We fervently hope that impartial history, by examining the above extracts, and the true God – 
not Neill’s God – will look more sympathetically and forgivingly at the few massacres by the 
Revolutionaries than at these wholesale slaughterings by the English. Are massacres in the 
cause of freedom justified? This question “should be left to God!” “Let God forgive me, for 
what I am doing, I am doing to win national independence for my country!” – this sentence 
would fit the mouth of Nana far better than that of Neill! It was the Revolutionaries who were 
“fighting for their country,” not Neill! And, if anyone performed a “duty” in massacres, it 
was the Revolutionaries alone, fired with the desire of fighting for Swaraj and Swadharma 
and burning for vengeance for all the oppressios that the Motherland suffered for a hundred 
years! 
17. Holmes’s Sepoy War, pages 229-230. 
But, of what use is all this philosophy now? Neill has sowed the seeds of cruelty and horror 
in Allahabad. Their abundant crops are already rising in the fields of Cawnpore. Let us, then, 
go towards Cawnpore to reap them in their full harvest!! 
162 
CHAPTER VIII CAWNPORE & JHANSI 
LET us now leave aside, for a moment, the bloody streams of the Revolutionary Ganges 
flowing about violently on the fields of Northern India with the holy desire of saving our 
forefathers from the bottomless pit of slavery, and turn to the events happening at its source 
at Haridwar. About the time of the Meerut rising, there were assembled a larger number of 
Revolutionary leaders in the palace of Nana Sahib than could be found, at the time, in the 
palace of Lucknow, in the Subah at Bareilly, or even at the Dewan-I-Khas palace at Delhi. 
The Revolution of 1857 was conceived in the palace at Brahmavarta. It was there that the 
embryo also took a definite shape. And, if the birth also had taken place at Brahmavarta, the 
Revolution would surely not have been so short-lived. But, before complete development, the 
thunder at Meerut brought the Revolutionary child into being, unfortunately before its time; it 
was not, however, left to its fate; but strenuous preparations were made in the palace at 
Brahmavarta to sustain and nourish it even under such adverse circumstances. 
163 
At the place of honour sat the proud and noble form of Nana Sahib, the very incarnation of 
the Revolutionary Spirit. His brothers, Baba Saheb and Bala Sahib, and his nephew Rao 
Sahib, were there, ready to sacrifice their lives, wealth, and comfort for the fulfilment of their 
leader’s noble objects. Besides these sat the man who, from the low station of a menial 
servant, had risen inhis master’s favour by means of his industry and ability, the man who 
had studied the politics and warfare of Europe, determined to utilise that knowledge in the 
holy war of liberating his country from slavery. This was none other than Azimullah Khan. 
There also sat the lightning Queen of Jhansi, aiding now the experience of the Revolutionary 
leaders with her magnificent intuition and inspiring them with her own unbounded love of 
country and honour. But in this historical meeting, who is the warrior over there, sharpening 
his sword in the direction of the armoury? 
Readers, that hero in the armoury is the celebrated Mahratta Tatia Tope. He is the last valiant 
Mahratta warrior of the School of Shivaji. There are many people who are brave, but the 
valour of this last Mahratta hero was the sword incarnate drawn by the Mother herself for her 
freedom. 
Tatia Tope was born in about 1814. His father’s name was Pandurang Bhat. Pandurang Bhat 
had eight sons and of them, the second was called Raghunath. It is this Raghunath who shines 
as the brilliant star of liberty in the galaxy of the heroes of Hindusthan. Pandurang Rao Tope 
was a Deshasth Brahmin and was the head of the charity department, under the late Bajirao 
Peshwa at Brahmavarta. In the verandah, Nana Sahib, the Jhansi Ranee, and Tatia Tope 
played the games of their childhood! Nana Sahib and Tatia Tope were intimate friends from 
childhood. In childhood, these two were trained in the same school, fitted to perform the 
heroic deeds which they did in the great event of their later life. They had read the Ramayana 
and the Mahabharata together; they had read together the accounts of the war-like deeds of 
the Mahrattas, and their young hearts had throbbed together at the noble inspiration which the 
stories of Hindu heroism awoke. 
Towards the end of April, Nana Sahib and Azimullah Khan had travelled through all the chief 
towns in Northern India to give the necessary unity to the work of the secret organisation. They were now waiting for the appointed time. Suddenly on the 15th of May, the news of the 
rising at Meerut and the subsequent freedom of Delhi came to Cawnpore. At this news of the 
premature rising, there was not the least apparent agitation in the palace of Brahmavarta. In a 
Revolutionary organisation are bound up together thousands of separate parts; it is 
164 
unavoidable that some should move too quickly and others too slowly, some at the appointed 
signal and others at the sudden impulse of the moment. The palace at Brahmavarta at once 
understood the situation and decided to turn the Meerut rising to advantage. But, to take such 
an advantage, which was the better course? To follow Delhi at once or wait till the first week 
of June according to the original plan? Of these two alternatives, the latter seemed preferable 
and, accordingly, the machinery at Brahmavarta continued to work secretly. 
Cawnpore was, for a log time, an important military station of the English. In Cawnpore, there were the 1st, 53rd and 56th Sepoy infantry, and a regiment of Sepoy cavalry – altogether 
three thousand Indian soldiers. The cavalty was wholly in the hands of the English and, 
besides, they had about a hundred English soldiers. The chief officer of the whole army was 
Sir Hugh Wheeler. Sir Hugh Wheeler was an old and very popular commander among the 
Sepoys. He had done good service in the Sikh and in the Afghan campaigns. The 
Government knew full well that the Sepoys were very much attached to him and nobody 
entertained any serious suspicion that secret societies were working among the Sepoy lines at 
Cawnpore. 
About the 15th of May, a peculiar agitation was to be seen in the whole of Cawnpore city. At 
the news of the doings of the Meerut Sepoys, their Cawnpore comrades had lost their usual stolidity and looked perturbed. But, the English authorities heard the news only on the 18th. 
As the telegraph communication to Delhi was cut, Sir Hugh Wheeler sent scouts to obtain 
correct information as to the extent of the disaffection. These scouts met on their way a 
Sepoy coming from Delhi, but he flatly refused to give any information to the Feringhis! It is 
a great mystery to English officers how, in 1857, the Sepoys quickly got from distant pointsnews of which the English authorities, with their telegraph system, were ignorant.1 The 
Sepoys had no necessity of learning of the Meerut rising after it took place; for, even a day 
before the events, human telegraphs had conveyed to them all detailed information! It is only 
after the English, at last, got the news of the Meerut rising that they began to think seriously 
about the secret agitation among the Cawnpore Sepoys. But Sit Huge Wheeler was still 
confident that the agitation was due to the extraordinary nature of the news that arrived from 
Meerut and would gradually subside. But there in the city of Cawnpore and in the Sepoy 
lines, everyone saw clearly that the days of English rule were over. Hindus and Mahomedans 
held big meetings; the Sepoys held secret conferences; school-masters and students discussed 
the rising; and everyone in the shops of the bazaars openly thought out plans. The fire of 
popular indignation, so far kept secret, now burst forth openly. People openly discussed in the 
165 
streets about driving out the English and the Sepoys refused to obey all orders except those given by their Swadeshi superiors.2 When an English lady went to the bazaar to make 
purchases, in the usual proud and haughty manner, a passer-by came up to her and said with a 
frown, “Enough of this haughtiness now! You should understand that you will soon be driven 
out of the bazaars of Hindusthan!” This was the rude awakening first experienced by the 
English. Seeing that it would be folly to keep quiet under these conditions, Sir Wheeler began 
to make preparations for the defence. 
1. “Indeed one of the most remarkable features of the mutiny has been the certain and 
the rapidity with which the natives were made aware of all important movements in distant 
places. The means of communication is chiefly by runners who forwarded messages from 
station to station with extraordinary celerity.” – Narrative, page 33. 
2. Nanak Chand’s Diary. 
His first thought was to select a place of refuge in case of danger. He selected one near the 
Sepoy lines, to the south of the Ganes. He fortified itby entrenchments, erected places for 
mounting guns, and even ordered a supply of provisions to be stored there. But, it is said that 
the Indian contractor, without Sir Wheeler’s knowledge, put a far smaller quantity of 
provisions than ordered for. Sir Wheeler and the English officers believed that, even if the 
Sepoys rose, this place would savethem from any material damage. For they would follow the 
example of their comrades in other places and march towards Delhi and would leave the 
English quietly to go down the Ganges and join the army at Allahabad! Sir Wheeler did not 
rest with the preparation of this fortified place as a protection for the English in case of a 
rising but he also sent urgent letters to Sir Hentyr Lawrence at Lucknow to send 
reinforcements! But such was the strength of the Revolutionary propaganda at Lucknow that 
Lawrence was crying for reinforcements himself! However, he immediately sent towards 
Cawnpore eighty-four English soldiers, the English artillery under Lieutenant Ashe, and 
some cavalty. There was nothing special in these preparations which Sir Wheeler made for 
the defence of the English. But the third remedy which he sought for removing the danger to 
the English power was one which now appears very extraordinary and yet gives a true idea of 
the skill in the Revolutionary organisation of the time. This was the request made by Sir 
Wheeler to the Raja of Brahmavarta to come to save Cawnpore! The news of Meerut had 
166 
produced an extraordinary agitation among the ranks of the Sepoys and the common people 
in the bazaars, but the palace of Brahmavarta appeared as quiet, peaceful, and unruffled as 
before. It was impossible to have discovered even a ruffle on its surface that would betray the 
tremendous internal agitation. The movement among the Cawnpore troops at least put Sir 
Wheeler on his guard. But, he never for a moment entertained any adequate suspicion that the 
Raja of Brahmavarta would go against him. The man whose crown the English had trampled 
under foot only a short time before, the Naga snake whom they had only just before enraged 
by wilfully treading on his hood, from that man the English now asked for protection in their 
hour of need! The English were not altogether mistaken in this procedure. Nana Sahib was “a 
gentle Hindu”, and how many cowardly Hindus are there not in India who are harmless and 
cringing even when trodden under foot by the English? In the pious belief that Nana Sahib 
was also one of them, Sir Wheeler invited his help. What better chance could there be for the Prince of Brahmavarta! He entered Cawnpore on the 22nd with two guns, three hundred 
private Sepoys, infantry and cavalry! There was a large number of civil and military officers 
of the English at Cawnpore. Nana encamped in the very midst of these English people. Now 
it was certain that, if there was a revolt at Cawnpore, the treasury would be attacked. How 
best to guard it? Of course by entrusting it to Nana Sahib! Soon two hundred of Nana’s 
Sepoys began to keep guard over it. Collector Hillersden profusely thanked Nana Sahib and 
Tatia Tope and it was even proposed that the English women and children should, if 
necessary, go for safety to the Nana’s palace at Brahmavarta! 
Here was Mahratta policy! That Nana should be invited with his troops to Cawnpore to 
‘protect’ the English and to fight against his countrymen rising for freedom, that heshould 
take his head-quarters in the English camp, that a treasure of lakhs of Rupees should be 
entrusted to him for better keeping and, above all this, that the English should thank him for 
his services! Here is Mahratta policy! Nana paid the English in their own coin. And all this, 
only a week before the great upheaval! From this it is evident how in 1857, the English were 
long left groping in the dark and then pushed down the precipice! The knowledge that 
Independence was the goal and War the means was clearly given to the general populace at 
that time; but, as to who were the leaders, what was the day of rising, what were the chief 
centres, all this was kept so secret that not only the English but even the rank and file of the 
Revolutionary society knew not much about it. The heads of the Central Secret Society and 
their faithful servants were the only men who had detailed information. This brings out the 
meaning of what we have said before that there was a secret committee in every regiment. 
The letter which fell into English hands at Benares was signed only “From a great leader”. 
167 
The responsible leaders conducted themselves in a manner suited to the work of the Secret 
Society. Even on the day before the rising, the English had not any adequate inkling about the 
plans of Emperor Bahadur Shah, Nana Sahib, or the Queen of Jhansi! And, amongst all these 
the palace of Brahmavarta kept the closest and strictest secrecy. The historian Kaye says: 
“Nana had not studied in vain the history of Shivaji, the founder of the Mahratta Kingdom!” 
The chief rendezvous of the secret societies of Cawnpore was the house of Subahdar Tikka 
Singh. Another place of meeting for the secret societies was the house of the Sepoy leader 
Shams-ud-din Khan. At these secret meetings, two faithful severants of the Brahmavarta 
palace household, Jwala Prasad and Mahomed Ali, used to attend on behalf of Nana Sahib. 
Subahdar Tikka Singh and Jwala Prasad – both hold, freedom-loving, and passionately 
sincere patriots – soon got a hold on the assembly and the whole army had unanimously 
sworn to obey their orders. So, the voice of Subahdar Tikka Singh was the voice of the whole 
army. It was extremely necessary that such a leader and Nana Sahib should personally meet 
and settle important points. Besides, the settled programme had become useless on account of 
the Meerut rising and the consequent confusion. It was therefore necessary to alter that 
programme to suit the changed circumstances, and for this it was decided that Tikka Singh and Nana should meet.3 In their first meeting, a long discussion tookl place. The Subahdar 
gave assurances that both Hindus and Mahomedans were ready to rise unanimously for 
Swadharma and Swaraj and were waiting only for Nana’s orders. After this, it was settled 
that another meeting, more secret and of longer duration, should be arranged to settle the minor details, and the Subahdar returned. On the evening of the 1st of June, Nana Sahib, 
accompanied by his brother Bala Sahib and his minister Azimullah Khan, came down to the 
banks of the sacred Ganges. There stood Subahdar Tikka Singh and the heads of the Secret 
Society awaiting him. The whole company then got into a boat. They entered the waters of 
the holy Ganges; everyone there took an oath, with the holy water of Ganges in his hands, 
that he would participate in the bloody war for his country’s liberty. Then followed a 
deliberation of two hours in which the whole of the future programme was definitely decided 
upon, and the company returned. Their secrets were known to the sacred Ganges along and in 
her hands they were safe! But this much is well known that, on the following day, 
Sham-su-ddin came to the house of his beloved Azizan and told her that within two days the 
Feringhis would be destroyed and India would be free! Sham-su-ddin did not give this news 
of freedom to her as empty bravodo; for, the heart of this beauty yearned as much for India’s 
freedom as that of her brave lover. Azizan was a dancing girl very much loved by the Sepoys; 
she was not one, however, who sold her love for money in the ordinary market, but in the 
168 
field of freedom it was given as a reward for the love of country. We will soon show further 
on how a delightful smile from her beautiful face encouraged fighting heroes and how a 
slight frown from her dark eyebrows hastily sent back to the field cowards who had come 
away. 
While the plans of the Revolutionaries were thus ripening, the terror in the English camp was 
beyond all description! Sir Wheeler sighed with relief when he got reinforcements from 
Lucknow and when the treasure and the arsenal had been put under the charge of Nana Sahib. 
But the English population had lost all courage. The 24th of May was the great Id festival of 
the Mahomedans. The English in every town apprehended a rising on that day. But the 
leaders in 1857 were not such fools as to rise on such an easily marked day. To keep peace 
ostentatiously on a day when a rising is expected by the enemy as certain and to burst forth 
on a day when the enemy thinks there is no chance whatever to trouble, in one of the chief 
means of carrying a Revolution to success. Therefore, even in Cawnpore, on the day of the Id 
3. Forrest’s State Papers and Trevelyan’s Cawnpore. 
festival, there was not the slightest disorder. The English were so much frightened that 
morning that Sir Wheeler telegraphed to Lucknow, “There will be a rising to-day inevitably!” 
But when, on the evening of thefestival, the Mahomedans paid and received visits as usual, 
Sir Wheeler was reassured. On the day of the birth of Queen Victoria, the usual salute of guns 
was not fired in the apprehension that the Seoys would be unnecessarily disturbed by the 
noise! Some English officers were heartily grieved that, on the birth-day of, Victoria, a salute 
dared not be fired in her honour; but what could the poor fellows do? If we look at the place 
erected by the English as a refuge in case of a rising as has been said before, we shall at once 
understand how helpless the condition of the English had become! Someone would purposely 
set up a rumour that the Sepoys had risen, as in the story of the wolf and the shepherd-boy, 
and caravans of the English would begin to run through the street with all possible speed! AN 
English officer wirtes : “Whilst I was there, buggies, palkies, gharries and vehicles of all sorts 
drove up and discharged cargoes of writers, tradesmen, ladies, women suckling infants, ayahs 
and children – and officers, too! – In short, if any insurrection took or takes place, we shall 
have no one to thank but ourselves, because we have shown to the natives how very easily we 
can be frightened, and when frightened, utterly helpless!” The cowardice exhibited in this 
conduct of the English, as this officer says, was thoroughly understood by the populace. 
When the entrenched place was being erected, had not Azimullah said the same to a 
169 
Lieutenant in a jocular vein? Azimullah Khan, in his usual sweet voice, asked the lieutenant, 
“Well, Sahib, what are you going to call this new building which you are constructing here? 
The lieutenant replied, “Really, I have not yet thought about it.” The smart Azimullah, with a 
wink in his eye, retorted, “Well, you can just call it ‘the castle of despair’.” 
One day towards the evening, a young gallant Englishman, under the influence of drink, shot 
a Sepoy. The shot missed but the Sepoy brought a case against the culprit. According to usual 
custom, the soldier culprit was declared not guilty and released, the reason given beingthat 
the gun went off while the accused was intoxicated! This decisio was the customary one, but alas! the times had changed!4 
4. Trevelyan says :- “The Sepoys, familier as they were with the brutality of low 
Europeans and the vagaries of military justice would at a less critical season have expressed 
small surprise either at the outrage or the decision. But, now, their blood was up and their 
pride awake, and they were not inclined to overrate the privileges of an Anglo-Saxon or the 
sagacity of the military tribunal.”- Cawnpore, page 93. 
At this insult, the whole Lashkar began to mutter among themselves, “Alright, our guns will 
also soon go off!” This became an exciting catch-word among the Sepoys. When they saw 
each other, they would say, “Well, now our guns are to go off, aren’t they?” The sarcastic 
greeting became common in the army. However, they decided to suppress their anger for the 
time and not to be hastened into a premature rising as at Meerut. 
To add fuel to the fire, the dead bodies of an Englishman and his wife were carried down the 
Ganges to Cawnpore. This testimony of the rising, in a city somewhere up the river, began to 
hold a terrible conversation with the city of Cawnpore. Oh! Ganges, how many more of the 
impure loads have you to carry before you send them to their ocean home! The English had 
now been so often deceived by the cry of “The wolf! The wolf!!” that they were frequently slumbering when the wold was really to come. On the 1st of June, Sir Hugh Wheeler wrote to 
Lord Canning, “Unrest and danger are no more. Not only is Cawnpore safe, but I am soon 
going to send help to Lucknow!” And the white troops which had come from Allahabad actually started for Lucknow! And that, on the 3rd of June! What a wonder that the plot – in 
whichthree thousand Sepoys and the whole city of Cawnpore, not excluding the dancing- 
girls, participated – should be kept sealed from the English and their auxiliary dogs like 
Nanak Chand! 
170 The seal was finally broken on the night of the 4th of June. According to the general 
programme, by dead of night, three shots were fired and the buildings already agreed upon 
were set fire to! This was the sign that the time for bloodshed, destruction, and death had 
begun. In the beginning, Tikka Singh’s horse leapt forth and, immediately, thousands of 
horses started galloping at a smart pace. Some started to burn English houses and stables, 
some ran to fetch other regiments, and some went to capture the military flags and banners. 
When the old IndianSubahdar-Major, in whose charge the flags were, began to dispute with 
the Revolutionaries, a blow of the sword on his head sent his corpse rolling on the ground. 
“Subahdar Tikka Sing’s Salaams to the Subahdar of the 1st infantry regiment. He asks the 
reason why the infantry is delaying when the cavalry had already risen against the Feringhis? Two galloping cavalrymen gave this message, and the whole of the 1st regiment came out 
with the cries of Victory! and Country! – Din! and Desh! At this, their officer, Colonel Ewart, 
said, “Oh! my children (Babalog), what is this? This disgraces your loyal character! Wait, 
children, wait!” But the Sepoys did not waste their time in listening to him. In a moment, the 
whole regiment marched in military order to jointhe cavalry, and then the whole army 
together marched to the music of war-songs to the Nana’s camp at Nabobganj! Nana’s 
Sepoys were ready at the Nabobganj treasury. They embraced their comrades and, at once, 
the enormous treasure and the great arsenal fell into the hands of the Revolutionaries! While 
this was going on at Nabobganj, there were still two regiments left behind at Cawnpore. The 
English immediately called them on parade in order to keep them in their hands. As the 
English had the artillery in their hands, the two regiments together with their officers stood in 
arms on the parade ground all night. At daybreak, the English officers satisfied themselves 
that these regiments at least were notrebellious. They were permitted to go back to their lines 
and the officers also began to leave. Now, the Sepoys saw a good chance. A couple of 
officers whispered something from a corner, and suddenly, one of them rushed forward and 
shouted, “God is on the side of Truth! Brethren, come arise!” At this order, swords began to 
flash on all sides, and, seeing the crisis coming, the English artillery opened fire. But the 
Sepoys had already gone beyond its range! It was quite possible for the Sepoys to have killed 
their officers at the time, but, without going so, they went away to join their comrades at the 
first opportunity. Thus, three thousand Sepoys encamped near Nana Sahib at Nabobganj, on the 5th of June. Sir Wheeler had one satisfaction – that not a single Englishman was killed. He 
thought that the Sepoys would, as usual, march towards Delhi, and the danger to Cawnpore 
would be over. 
171 
And if there had been a lack of able leaders in Cawnpore as there was in other places, the 
Sepoys, would, indeed, have gone to Delhi as Sir Wheeler surmised. But, at Nabobganj, at 
the time, there was no such lack of bold and able leaders. Nana Sahib was there; his brothers, 
Bala Sahib, Baba Sahib, and his nephew Rao Sahib were there; Tatia Tope was there; and 
Azimullah Khan too was there. When such brilliant and intellectual leaders were there, what 
need had the Sepoys to go to Delhi to seek one? The best interests would not be served by 
shutting up all the available forces in Delhi alone. The successful plan would be to harass the 
English in various places. Above all, as Cawnpore to a great extent commanded the line of 
communications between the Panjab, Delhi, and Calcutta, it was necessary to strike a blow at 
Cawnpore and capture it. When the Subahdar’s and Nana’s men had explained all this to the 
Sepoys, it was unanimously decided to turn back towards Cawnpore. The three thousand 
Sepoys elected Nana Sahib their King and expressed an ardent desire to see him. When he 
appeared, he was hailed with tremendous enthusiasm and they saluted him with all royal 
honours. When the election of the King was over, with his consent, the Sepoys procceeded to 
elect their officers; Subahdar Tikka Singh, the very life of the Revolutionary centre at 
Cawnpore, was elected the chief commander of the cavalty and was given the title of 
“General”. New army regulations were issued. Jamadar Dalganjan Singh was made the colonel of the 53rd regiment, and Subahdar Ganga Din of the 56th regiment. Then, there was a 
grand procession of the flag of freedom on the back of an elephant, and on the same day it 
was proclaimed by beat of drum that Nana Sahib had commenced to reign. 
After these elections, Nana Sahib did not waste even a second.When the English received the 
information that the Sepoys did not go to Delhi but had stopped on the way, they entrenched 
themselves in the new fort and had their artillery ready. Their number was about one 
thousand, men, women, and children all told. It was of the first importance to capture this 
fortified place, and Nana Sahib ordered the whole army to march thither. The English were not certain that the Revolutionaries would attack them; but, early on the morning of the 6th, 
Sir Wheeler received a note. It was from Nana Sahib and was couched in the following 
terms:- “We are going to begin the attack. We want to warn you, and therefore send this 
previous notice to you.” When he received this invitation to fight, Sir Wheeler got ready all 
his officers and soldiers and artillery men, and made all necessary preparations for the fight. 
The fact that, before beginning the battle, Nana Sahib gave a previous written note to the 
English when it was in no way called for, is of the greatest importance. The English would 
172 
certainly not have shown thie generosity had they been in Nana’s place. Those, who always 
try to pour foul disgrace on Nana Sahib’s name, should bend their heads with shame at this 
act of natural gallantry! If we remember these two facts, the saving of the lives of all English 
officers at the time of the rising and the twelve hours’ previous written notice given by Nana 
Sahib, and then read the final scenes, we will appreciate better the real situation at Cawnpore. 
Soon after sending the notice to battle to the English Subahdar (now General) Tikka Singh 
went towards the arsenal and was busy, all the morning, arranging the arms etc.and sending 
them to the place of attack. Guns were pointed against the English fort from the side of the 
river as well as from land. The plan of the attack was formed with true military skill. At the 
same time, the Cawnpore town was also in a tumult! Spinners, sword-smiths, and people 
from the bazaar, Mussalmans, and the influential silver-merchants – everybody took anything 
that came to hand and were looking for Englishmen. Offices, courts, and all English records, 
old and new, were burnt, and those Englishmen that forgot to betake themselves to the fort 
were killed. It was now mid-day. At about one the English fort began to be beseiged, and, 
about evening, the guns began to boom and the attack commenced. 
The English had about eight cannon and plenty of ammunitions which they had already kept 
buried in the fort. The Revolutionaries, also, had captured the arsenal and the big buns and 
they too were not hard up for ammunition. General Tikka Singh had from the first kept the 
artillery in excellent condition. Nana Sahib’s guns played great havoc on the English buildings within the fort. When, on the 7th of June, the artillery of the Revolutionaries began 
to do its terrible work, English women and children, who had never been in such a plight 
before, began to run about here and there crying frantically. But habit took away the terror 
even of death, and balls flying over the heads created no greater surprise than birds flying in 
the air. Two days after the attack was commenced, the supply of water in the fort began to 
fall short. There was only one well within the fort which was of any use but the 
Revolutionaries had a keener eye on it than the English soldiers themselves. The heat of the 
sun was so strong that the soldiers would die of sunstroke. All hearts became hardened like 
stone. The difference between the sexes, and modesty, vanished. Children died for want of 
milk and sorrow killed the mothers. Let alone burying the dead, but it even became 
impossible to inquire who was dead and who was alive. For even while making a list of the 
living, some name would have to be scored off. To draw a true picture of such situations, the 
best way is to describe the events of a typical hour. Captain Thomas, relating his experience, 
says: “While Armstrong was lying wounded, Lieutenant Prole came to see him. Just as he 
173 
uttered a few words consolation, a bullet from the Sepoys struck him in the thigh and he fell 
down. With his hand on my shoulder and mine round his waist, I began to lift him to take him 
to thesergeant. Before I had gone many steps, there was a buzzing noise and a bullet entered 
my shoulder. I and Prole both fell dying on the floor. Seeing this, Gilbert Bucks came 
running towards us. But the enemy’s bullet came after him, pierced his body through, and he 
fell at once in the jaws of Death.” This account of one hour gives a good idea of the history of 
those twenty-one days! When Sir Wheeler’s son was wounded, his two sisters and his mother 
were giving him medical assistance in a room. But, before he could take the medicine, there 
was a fearful explosion and a cannon ball carried away the young man’s head. While 
Magistrate Hillersden was talking to his wife in the verandah, a twenty pound cannon ball 
burst on his head and he was blown to pieces. A few days later, the wall on which the widow 
was leaning collapsed and she met her death. There were seven women in a ditch near the 
forst. A bomb explosed and not only killed them all, but it also killed the English soldier who, 
before the rising, had shot the Sepoy and had been acquitted as not guilty. So at last the guns 
of the Sepoys also went off! And, when they did go off, it was in such a manner that 
succeeding English soldiers will remember it for ever, even when under the influence of 
drink! 
In this terrible siege, there were, also, some foolish Indians who thought it their duty to be 
faithful to the English. They were there, in the jaws of death, simply for the sake of “loyalty”! 
An Indian nurse in the employ of the English lost both her arms by a bomb explosion. Butlers 
running about here and there to give hot food to their masters also fell dead frequently by 
shells. Indian bhishtis often risked their lives to give water to the English. Water was so 
scarce that children would suck the leather bags containing water! Cholera, dysentery, and 
typhoid also did not fail to take their revenge on the English. Sir George Parker, Colonel 
Williams, and Lieutenant Rooney died through illness. Those that did not succumb to shells 
or sickness went insane from the terrific fright of the ghastly living cemetery. Such was the 
pandemonium there. Sp, in return for the cruel wrongs of a century, Revenge incarnate was 
crushing everyone she found in her terrific jaws for twenty-one days, and was dancing with a 
ghastly smile! 
While such was the state within the fort, the English guns placed outside did great service in 
the fight. Chief officers of the artillery, Ashe, Captain Moore, Caption Thompson, and other 
brave soldiers fought with a splendid valour. The English had great hopes of speedy succour 
from Lucknow or Allahabad. On account of the strict scouting of the Revolutionaries, it had 
become impossible to carry on correspondence. Still, on Indian messenger had carried as far 
174 
as Lucknow a letter by Siur Wheeler, partly in Latin, partly in French, and partly in English, 
and packed in the quill of a bird. It said only, “Help! Help!! Help!!! Send us help or we are 
dying! If we get help, we will come and save Lucknow!"”But, the vigilance of the 
Revolutionaries was usually so good that hardly any such messenger from the English camp 
could get back there safe. The English often sent scouts, empowering them to promise lakhs 
of Rupees if they could find any traitors in the Revolutionary camp. But not one lives to 
return and give information! For example, we will give an account given by one of the scouts 
himself. “When Mr. Shephered lost his wife and daughter, he undertook the task of getting 
information from the Revolutionaries’ camp and sowing dissensions in Cawnpore. He set out 
in the disguise of an Indian cook. Hardly had he gone a short distance when he was arrested 
and brought before Nana Sahib. When he was asked about the state of the English, he began 
to give false and glowing descrptions as agreed upon. But seeing that two women, captured 
just before he was caught, had told the true story of despair, he got confused. He was first pur in a prison and, on the 12th of July, he was brought before a court and sentenced to three 
years’ rigorous imprisonment.” From this will be seen the regard for justice which Nana had, 
even in the heat of the war. Though English scouts were thus baulked, the scouts of the 
Revolutionaries did their work exceedingly well. One day, a bhishti (water-carrier) stood, on 
a high piece of ground near the English fort and cried, “Even disregarding the fear of death, 
since I love the English so much, I have come to convey to you a piece of joyful news. An 
English army with guns has come up on the other bank of the Ganges. It will start to-morrow 
to relieve you. This news has created a perfect consternation among the rascally rebels and 
we, all loyalists, have become ready to join the English!” At this news, the English imagined 
that their scouts must have successfully sowed discord among the Revolutionaries and, also, 
that the English army from Lucknow must have arrived. On the next day, the same bhishti 
came up and cried, “Victory to the English! The English army was late on account of floods 
in the Ganges; but, now, all is accomplished and they are coming. Before the end of the day, 
my masters will be victorious.” That day passed, and so also the next; but the strained eyes of 
the English could see neither the army of succour nor the loyalist bhishti! Azimullah, now, 
knew enough of the misery of the English camp, and it was not again necessary for the 
bhishti to risk his life. The English were often taken in by such resourceful tricks of the 
Revolutionary scouts. 
After giving notice of the siege on the 6th of June to the English, Nana Sahib had brought his 
camp close to the besieging armies and near by the tent of General Tikka Singh. When 
Cawnpore became free, the whole province became flooded by a great wave of Revolution. 
175 
Every day, new Zemindars and princes came with their retinues and joined Nana Sahib’s 
camp. Nana had now about four thousand troops under him; but, of these, the artillerymen 
were the most active in their duties. Here in one quarter Nanhi Nabob took his stand. When 
the rising began, his house and property were ordered to be confiscated for his fanatical 
Hindu hatred. But soon, a compromise took place and he joined that war of freedom. The 
artillery in Nana’s charge were manned by the finest marksmen and old pensioners. While the 
Revolutionaries were making efforts to set fire to the English buildings within the fort, an 
amateur artillery man discovered a new explosive. The first experiment was so successful that 
the barracks, which were of immense value to the English and against which it was thrown, 
were soon burnt to ashes! There was so much competition amongst the people to join in firing 
the batteries that women helped men, and old men helped young men in the work. One 
quotation will show how, in that season of noble ideals and inspiration, the masses had risen 
up. A native Christian says, “While I sat on a mat disguised as a Mahomedan, I saw men 
returning to supply waters to those who were fighting. Suddenly, one of them came up to me 
and said, ‘While our countrymen are fighting there, it is a shame that a young Mahomedan 
like you should sit here killing flies! Come there to help at the artillery.’ He also told me that 
the young son of the one-eyed pensioner Karim Ali had done a great deed that day. He had 
made some discovery and set fire to the English buildings. For this bravery, he was rewarded 
with ninety rupees and a shawl.” To sit idly, instead of fighting for the country, was 
considered a disgrace not only toa young man but even to woman; so, the women of 
Cawnpore had left their Zenans and jumped into the battle-field. But all these young soldiers 
and heroic women were put to shame by the ardour of a beauty which was no other than the 
dancing girl Azinan, above-mentioned. She had now put on a heroic garb. With her rosy 
cheeks and smiling lips, she was there on horseback, fully armed. And the artillery Sepoys 
would forget all their fatigue at the sight of her. Nanak Chand says, in his diary, “Armed 
Azinan is flashing everywhere like lightning; often she stands in the streets giving milk and 
sweetmeats to tired and wounded Sepoys.” 
Even while the fight was going on in this manner, Nana Sahib was making all possible 
arrangements for the civil administration. Though it is always a difficult task to introduce 
order in the revenue and police departments at a critical time like that of a Revolution, Nana 
Sahib first began the work of giving justice and protection to the inhabitants. The prominent 
citizens of Cawnpore were called together and the man elected by the majority of them, Holas 
Singh by name, was given the office of chief magistrate. Nana Sahib gave strict orders that 
Holas Singh should protect the citizens from disorderly Sepoys or bandit villagers. The work 
176 
of supplying provisions to the army was entrusted to a citizen, called Mullah. A court was 
appointed to settle civil and criminal disputes. Jwala Prasad, Azimullah Khan, and others 
were made judges and Baba Sahib was made the President. From the few documents of this 
court that are extant, it is abundantly clear that those guilty of oppression or disorder were 
severely punished and that great care was bestowed on the maintenance of order. A man 
convicted of a very heinous theft had his right hand cut off. A Mahomedan butcher was given 
the same punishment for killing a cow. Vagabonds without any profession and people convicted of small thefts were publicly disgraced in the streets on the back of a donkey.5 Like 
the Committee of Public Safety established during the French Revolution, this court 
gradually encroached upon all the other departments. To supply ammunition in case of 
shortage, to supply clothes to the army, to try the arrested English scouts, to punish rogues 
who wanted to escape – all these were done by this court. It also gave rewards to those who 
discovered English refugees. 
5. Thomson’s Cawnpore. 
The attack of the Revolutionaries on the English fort took place on the 12th. Rather than take 
it by a general assault, the general plan of the Revolutionaries was to reduce it by harassing 
the English on all sides by artillery. They also directed assaults now and then. After both 
sides had lost some men the Revolutionaries would retire. The vigour and courage of the 
artillery was not equalled by the cavalry and the infantry. This fault will also be prominently 
noticed in the sieges of Delhi and Lucknow; but, in the siege of Cawnpore also, more 
importance was attached to the artillery than to hand-to-hand sight. Not that the Sepoys were, at all, afraid of death. The valour and bravery the Sepoys displayed in the assault, on the 18th 
of June, on the fort were remarkable. On this day, disregarding the cannon-fire of the enemy, 
they ran straight, like arrows, at the enemy’s camp, mounted the walls, took an English gun, 
and turned its mouth, and it seemed for a moment that the flag of freedom would never be set 
back. Instead of helping such brave Sepoys, some had, on the other hand, sworn as it were to 
create disorder without reason and bring confusion in all the ranks. This weakness compelled 
the whole army to return. Like the brave Sepoys of Oudh, some brave hearts at Cawnpore did 
their duty, as heroes always do, without waiting to see what the others did. One day when the 
assaulting party was retiring, one Sepoy lay down there, pretending to be dead. When Captain 
Jenkins, renowned for his bravery and a bold fighter, came up there galloping confidently, the 
Sepoy jumped suddenly at his prey and shot him dead in the neck in an instant! 
177 
The 23rd of June came. One hundred years before, on this day, the English had laid the foundations of their power on the battle-field of Plassey. On that 23rd of June, the English got 
their first decisive victory in Hindusthan. The sting of the insult of that unfortunate day was 
burning in the heart of Hindusthan so much that, even after a hundred years, that evil day and 
its evil memory was fresh in the heart of all Indians. The terrible would of slavery inflicted on 
that day had not been healed even after a hundred years. No balm had yet been found that 
could heal it! What a righteous hatred was rankling in the heart even of the peaceful and 
forgiving India? In the last breath of every dying generation and in the first breath of every 
new one being born, she has been mixing in the spirit of revenge for Plassey! This went on for a hundred years, and the morning of the 23rd of June, 1857, had risen. Astologers had 
foretold that at last on this day the Mother would be avenged. Nana Sahib! Though the 
fulfilment of the prophecy is in the hands of God, you are to do your duty towards achieving 
the end! 
And not to lose the chance of that auspicious day, the 23rd of June saw the whole of Nana 
Sahib’s camp in a terrible commotion. All the divisions, if not every man of the army, had got 
ready to direct an assault as had never been directed before. The artillery, the cavalry, and the 
infantry – all, inspired by the memory of that historical day, came down into the battle-field. 
The bravest of them assembled together and took oaths – the Hindus with Ganges water and 
the Mahomedans on the Koran – that, on that day, they would either acquire freedom or die 
fighting! The cavalry rushed forward and came up to the walls without heeding the enemy’s 
artillery. The infantry, under cover of big bags of cotton which they pushed along, showered 
bullets on the fort, from the other sides. People from the neighbouring villages had also come 
to join the Revolutionaries. From within the fort, the English also kept up an incessant fire. 
Though they could not check the forward movement of the Revolutionists, they prevented 
them from breaking into the fort that day. 
Nevertheless this last attach at Cawnpore did not go in vain. After that day’s fight the English 
lost all hope. They were full of despair and saw clearly that it was thenceforth impossible to hold the fort against Nana Sahib. Though not on the 23rd, yet on the 25th of June, they hoisted 
on their wall the flag of truce! On seeing this flag, Nana Sahib ordered the fighting to stop6 
and sent to General Wheeler a letter by the hand of a captive English woman. The note ran: 
“To the subjects of Queen Victoria. Those who have had no connection with Dalhousie’s 
178 
policy and those who are ready to lay down arms and surrender will be safely conveyed to 
Allahabad.” This note was written by Azimullah Khan at the order of Nana Sahib. 
When General Wheeler received the note, he gave authority to Captains Moore and Whiting 
to consider it and the two officers resolved upon a surrender to Nana Sahib. The next morning, on the 26th Jwala Prasad and Azimullah Khan, on behalf of Nana Sahib and Moore, 
Whiting, and Roche, on behalf of the English, met near the walls. First, the conversation 
began in English, but soon Jwala and Azim forced them to carry on the conversation in 
Hindusthani – the language of the nation. The terms settled were that the English should hand 
over all the artillery, arms and ammunition, and the treasure to Nana Sahib, and Nana Sahib should give provisions to and convey the party to Allahabad.7 The agreement was drawn up 
6. Tatia Tope, in his statement, says: - “The English general raised the flag of peace 
and the fighting ceased.” 
7. Red Pamphlet. 
on paper and Azimullah khan and others returned to get Nana Saheb’s signature. In the 
afternoon there was some difference as to whether the English should start the same night or 
the next morning. However, a compromise was arrived at, and it was agreed that Nana Sahib 
should take charge of everything that night and the English should leave early the next 
morning. Mr.Todd (formerly English reader at Nana’s palace) came to Nana Sahib with a 
copy of the treaty agreed upon by both parties. Nana showed great hospitality towards him 
and inquired as to his health, etc. The same evening, the English laiddown their arms; the 
guns were handed over to Nana Sahib; and Brigadier Jwala Prasad, with two companions, 
came and took his quarters within the fort. The same right Holas Singh, the magistrate at 
Cawnpore, and Tatia Tope ordered boatmen to keep forty boats ready. The English officers 
who came to elephants to see them complained that the boats were ruded and uncomfortable. 
So a hundred labours were employed immediately; bamboo coverings and canopies were 
erected, good seats were made, and corn and other provisions were also loaded on the boats. 
The English now prepared to go out of Cawnpore. But, we must also see who were now 
coming in these. Unless we take an account of the incomings as well as the outgoings, we 
shall not be able to understand later events. When the news spread everywhere that Nana had 
179 
raised the flat of freedom at Cawnpore, a constant flood of heroes was pouring in thither. 
Young national volunteers from every place were repairing towards Cawnpore. A town, 
which could not send men, sent money. But, alas! it was not only these volunteers that were 
now crowding into Cawnpore. Day and night helpless people, who had been unsuccessful in 
their efforts and who were tired of English slavery, also came to the camp in large numbers. 
Thousands of Sepoys from Allahabad and Kashi had come to Cawnpore in the preceding 
week with the news of the cruel vengeance which the English had taken on their comrades 
and their wives and children. Hundreds of young Indian sons, whose fathers had been hanged 
in shapes of the figures – “8” and “9”, also had come there. Husbands whose wives and infant 
sons in the cradle had been burnt by Neill also came. Fathers whose daughters had their hair 
and clothes set fire to by English soldiers amid shouts of applause, also crowded the place. 
Men whose properties were burnt to ashes, men whose religion was trampled under foot, men 
whose nation had been enslaved, such men created a tumult round the banner of freedom with 
shouts of “Revenge! Revenge!!” And, when the day of victory had arrived, Nana Sahib’s 
promise to convey the English to Allahabad dispelled all the hopes of the Sepoys and the 
people, and they began to grumble aloud. The English officers who came to look after the 
preparation of boats distinctly heard whispers of “Massacre” (Katal) among the Sepoys 
lounging about on the banks of the Ganges! It is also said that a palace Pundit had explained 
to the Sepoys how, in the eyes of religion, there was no sin in beheading men who had broken faith with a nation and had enslaved it!8 
On the 27th of June, the sun rose on this disturbed atmosphere. The English were to be seen 
off from the Sati Chowda Ghat. The cavalry and the infantry stood round the Ghat and the 
artillery was also in position. Thousands of the citizens of Cawnpore had also assembled at 
the Ghat, since the morning, to witness the scene on the banks of the Ganges, each with his 
own mental picture of it. Azimullah Khan, Bala Sahib, and the Commander Tatia Tope, also 
stood on the terrace of a temple near the Ghat. The name of the temple too was fitting to the 
occasion. Inside was the image of “Har Dev” and it appeared as if the lordship of the whole 
region was vested for the time being solely in the hands of Shiva, the Terrible! Nana Sahib 
had sent the best conveyances to take the English from the fort to the Ganges bank. For Sir 
Wheeler, a beautifully decorated elephant, with Nana Sahib’s own mahut, came and stood at 
the gate of the fort. Sir Wheeler did not like the idea of being taken in such a melancholy 
procession on an elephant; so, he seated his family on it and betook himself to a palanquin. 
The English women had also palkees allotted to them. The procession started. The English 
flat at the fort was hauled down and the flag of freedom and religion flew in its stead! Instead 
180 of having heart-burnings at this insult to English prestige, the prisoners expressed joy at being 
released from the jaws of death. In the flush of joy of a renewed life, they left the fort and 
proceeded hastily – but whither? 
However, it is useless to discuss that question at this stage. The Ganges ghat is still a mile and 
a half afar. When this procession, after going though the mile and a half, got down on the 
sands, the Sepoy lines closed from behind and guarded the way. While embarking on the 
boats from the palkees and elephants, no Indian came forth that day to help the English. Yes; 
but there were exceptions. In one or two cases, they did get help when they were getting 
down but, then, the Sepoys offered their swords, not their hands. The wounded Colonel Ewart 
had been put in a doli. A Sepoy stopped his doli and said: “Well, Colonel, how do you like 
this parade? How are the regimental uniforms?” With these words, he dragged him down 
from the Palkee and cut him to pieces. His wife was near by. Some said to her : “You are a 
woman and your life will be spared!” But, one frightful young man rushed forward, shouting, 
8. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore. 
“Get away! A woman? Yes. But she is a Feringhi! Cut her to pieces!” Before he finished the 
sentence, the thing was done! 
The English committee itself has admitted after enquiry that all the boats on the river 
contained ample provisions on board. The English waded through the water and took their 
seats in them. Everywhere there was a dead silence and calm. The boats were almost 
crowded. The boatmen were ready with their oars. At last, Tatia Tope waved his hand 
backward and forward in the air as the sign for the boats to start. Suddenly, in one corner, 
some one blew a bugle to break the terrible silence. As soon as the shrill sound of the bugle 
was heard, a crashing noise started -–the noise of guns, rifles, swords, kukris, and bayonets. 
The boatmen jumped from the boats and came to the bank, and the Sepoys rushed into the 
water with a jump! No other sound was heard but “Maro Feringhiko!” 
Soon all the boats caught fire, and men and women and children all jumped hastily into the 
Ganges. Some began to swim, some were drowned, some were burnt and most succumbed to 
bullets sooner or later! Lumps of flesh, broken heads, severed hair, chopped-off arms and 
legs, and a stream of blood! The whole Ganges became red! As soon as anyone took up his 
181 
head above water, he was shot by a bullet; if he kept it under water, he woluld die of 
asphyxia! Such was the wrath of Har Dev! Such was the one hundredth anniversary of 
Plassey! 
It was ten o’clock in the morning. It is said that, at this time, Nana Sahib was quietly pacing a 
hall in the palace. What wonder that he was uneasy in that palace, while an account of the 
century’s wrongs was being settled! Such moments are epochs in history. They are the final 
strokes of a period, the summary of an age. Heaven knows his thoughts, at that time, when he 
was pacing the hall! But he was not allowed time to think much longer; for, a cavalryman 
came galloping fast and informed him that the Sepoys had commenced an indiscriminate 
massacre of the English on Sati Chowda Ghat. Hearing this, Nana Sahib remarked that there 
was no necessity of molesting the women and the children and made the same man gallop 
back fast with the stringent order, “Kill the Englishmen! But no harm is to be done to the women and children!”9 We must notice, while passing, that the second part of Nana Sahib’s 
9. Forrest’s State Papers. Almost all English historians admit that Nana sent this order 
as soon as he heard the report. Also Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 258. 
order is conspicuous by its absence in Neill’s orders! When Nana Sahib’s order reached Sati 
Chowda, the Sepoys were in the height of their dread work. Some Englishmen were burning 
in the heap of tottering boats, while some were attempting to swim across the river. The 
Sepoys also jumped into the water and followed them like wild dogs, shouting and foaming 
with rage. With their swords in the teeth and revolvers in the hand, the Sepoys began the 
terrible hunt in the water. General Wheeler was killed in the first rush. Henderson also fell. 
But it is easier to given a list of those that survived than of those that died! As soon as Nana 
Sahib’s order arrived, the massacre was at once stppped and one hundred and twenty-five 
women and children were taken alive out of the water. They were taken as prisoners to Savda 
Kothi. The remaining Englishmen were made to stand in a line and the order for their 
execution was read to them. One of them asked to be given time to read to his comrades some sentences from a prayer-book, and the request was granted.10 When the prayer was finished, 
the Sepoys quickly cut off their heads with swords! Out of the forty boats, only one boat 
escaped; and out of the Englishmen in it, only three or four were saved from the attacks of the 
villagers, and that too, because a Zemindar, called Durvijay Singh, took pity on them! This 
Zemindar kept the naked and dying Englishmen for a month and then sent them down to 
Allahabad. 
182 
In short out of one thousand living Englishmen and women, on the 7th of June at Cawnpore, only four men and one hundred and twenty-five women and children survived on the 30th. 
The women and children were in the prisons of Nana Sahib and the four half-dead men were 
partaking of medicine and hospitality in the house of Durvijay Singh. It is here necessary to 
record briefly the arrangements made by Nana Sahib as regards the imprisoned women and 
children. We would have had no occasion to refer to this at all, had not English writers 
published a series of “reliable information” and most shameless accusations that the women 
were violated, that they were insulted in the streets, that Nana Sahib himself attempted to 
violate them, etc., and had not the English nation been so blind and wicked as to believe these 
despicable and diabolical falsehoods! It is distinctly stated by the special commission appointed by the English in this behalf that all these accusations are false.11 Still this does not 
end the question. Not only did Nana Sahib save these women from massacre and thus put to 
10. Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 263. 
11. Muir’s Report and Wilson’s Report, See also, Kaye and Malleson’s Indian 
Mutiny, Vol. II, page 267. 
Shame Neill, Reynold, and Havelock, but, in that conflagration of 1857, Nana Sahib did not 
show to the treacherous enemy who ruined individuals, the nation, and religion, even a 
hundredth part of the severity and cruelty which, in similar conditions and under similar 
provocations, England herself has shown to India, Austria to Italy, Spain to the Moors, or 
Greece to the Turks. And this is proved by the histories of the English themselves. 
In the first confusion of the massacre at Cawnpore, four English women and some half-caste 
women had been taken away by some cavalrymen. At this news, Nana Sahib had the Sepoys immediately arrested and disgraced. He compelled them to restore the women at once.12 The prisoners were given chapatees, and meat occasionally.13 They were not forced to do hard 
labour in any sense. The children were given milk. Over them was kept a chief wardress, 
called Begum. Since cholera and dysentery broke out in the prison, they were brought out to take fresh air, thrice every day.14 It would not be here out of place to give a small anecdote to 
show how the people were furious even at the name, “English”. One morning, a Brahmin 
peeped over the prison wall and saw English women who would never go out except in a 
183 
palanquin, wash their clothes. Moved at this sight, the Brahmin remarked to his neighbour, 
“Why do they not allow them a washerman?” As a check to this excessive humanity, the 
neighbour slapped the Brahmin hard in the face! A few of the women in the prison used to 
grind corn and each of them was given flour for one chapatee free. This showed them what it 
meant to work for one’s living! What was the end of this imprisonment and what was the 
reason for that end will appear at its proper time. We will leave the women and children in 
prison and now turn to more important matters. 
12. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore, page 299. 
13. Narrative, page 113. 
14. Neill himself says in his report: At first they were badly fed but afterwards they 
got better food and clean clothing and servants to wait upon.” 
When all the emblems of English rule had been wiped out of Cawnpore, Nana Sahib held a great Durbar, about five o’clock on the afternoon of the 28th. In honour of the Durbar, there 
was also a military parade of the whole army present. Six regiments of infantry, and two of 
cavalry, besides bands of Revolutionaries, with their banners, who had come from various 
places to join in the war, were present at the ceremony. The artillery by whose power 
Cawnpore was conquered was deservedly given the place of honour. Bala Sahib was, from 
the first, very popular in the army and got a splendid ovation when he arrived. At first, there 
was a salute of 101 guns in honour of the Emperor of Delhi which shows how, in 1857, 
Hindus and Mahomedans had forgotten all their animosities. Next when Nana Sahib arrived 
in the camp, he was acclaimed with shouts and received a salute of twenty-one guns. Some 
said the twenty-one guns represented the twenty-one days of the siege. Nana Sahib thanked 
the army for the great honour and said, “This victory belongs to all of us. All have an equal 
glory therein.” It was then announced that Nana Sahib had ordered one lakh of Rupees to be 
distributed to the army as a reward for its victory and, when he presented himself on the 
parade, another salute of twenty-one guns was fired. Then, Nana’s nephew – Rao Sahib, and 
brothers – Baba Sahib and Bala Sahib, each got a salute and seventeen guns in their honour. 
Brigadier Jwala Prasad and Commander Tatia Tope were given the honour of eleven guns 
184 
each. In this manner, the evening sun heard the martial song of freedom through the din of 
cannon, and then the whole army returned to the camp. After the military review, Nana 
Sahib, in company with his brother Bala Sahib, proceeded to the historically famous palace of Brahmavarta. The 1st of July was fixed as the day of coronation. On that day, what splendour 
there was in the palace! The old historic throne of the Peshwas was brought with great 
ceremony into the Durbar Hall, and Nana Sahib, with the royal Tilaka on his forehead, amidst 
the booming of guns and the thundering applause of thousands, ascended the throne which 
was indedpendent, earned by his prowess, supported by the populace, and blessed by religion. On that day, hundreds from Cawnpore sent presents to Nana Sahib.15 The Mahratta throne 
which the English hurled down from Raigarh thus re-emerged out of the Ganges flowing red 
with English blood. The Hindus all over the land hailed it with “Raja Ramchandra ki Jay!!!” 
But while Nana Sahib was straining every nerve to regain freedom in childhood, Rani 
Lakshmi Bai, a fellow competitor with him in childhood at Bramhavarta in horse-riding and 
15. Trevelyan’s Cawnpore, page 293. 
elephant-riding, did not keep idle. When Nana Sahib cast the die on the battlefield for 
independence at Cawnpore, she did the same at Jhansi. She was as close an associate to him 
in the game of Revolution as she was in the games of childhood. On the 4th of June, on the 
same day that Cawnpore was suffused with the clouds of fiery fume of cannonade, the Rani of Jhansi too dashed out like lightning and joined the battle of freedom. On the 4th June, 
Jhansi rose. Before this rising, a few letters fell into the hands of the British commissioner at 
Jhansi from which it appeared that Lakshman Rao, a Brahmin in the Ranee’s service, was 
organising a Revolution and, as a preliminary, intended to kill the British officers in 
command of the army. But while the English were discussing amongst themselves as to what 
precautions were to be taken, on the same day, the Revolutionists took possession of the fort. 
Finding this, the English sent to take shelter in the city fort. The Revolutionaries made an attack upon that also, and took it. On the 7th, Rasaldar Kala Khan and Tahsildar Mahomed 
Hussein of Jhansi and other valiant soldiers led the attack and the flag of Revolution was 
hoisted on the fort of Jhansi. The English, on the other hand, hoisted the white flag and 
craved for peace. Hakim Salay Mahomed, a prominent citizen of Jhansi, promised to spare 
the lives of the English, if they surrendered unconditionally. The English laid down their 
arms, and the doors of the fort were opened. But when the English came out of the gates, the 
185 
soldiers shouted, “Maro Feringhiko!” The Sepoys had known how the English had massacred 
their women and children and how Neill had burnt whole villages and were infuriated beyond measure. On the 8th, a procession was led through the city and the English were made to 
march in the procession as prisoners of war. The very English people, who were wielding the 
highest authority at Jhansi only a week before, were, to-day, parading as captives. As they 
were approaching Johan Bagh the Sepoys asked the general, “Rasaldar Sahib, what further 
orders?” The Rasaldar ordered that the Feringhis who were guilty of treason in having dared 
to dethrone the Ranee and annex the country should not be spared and that, therefore, they 
should be drawn up in three separate rows of men and women, and children and, as soon as 
the jail Daroga decapitated the commissioner in the line of men, immediately the rest of the 
lines of men, women and children should be beheaded. In a second, blood began to flow in 
streams. Thus, they died as victims of the merciless annexation policy of Lord Dalhousie 
refusing to recognise the adoption made by the queen. 
About seventy-five men, twelve women, and twenty-three children were decapitated by the 
Revolutionaries and, there being no legal or adopted heir of the English to represent them, the 
Revolutionaries annexed the Kingdom of Jhansi to the Ranee’s crown as the guardian of her 
son, Damodar Rao. They declared : “The Universe belongs to God, the country to the 
Emperor, and the authority to Ranee Lakshmibai.!”16 
186 
16. There is an authoritative work on the life of the Queen of Jhansi by a well known 
Marathi historian, and there the able author has established by an incontestable array of 
proofs that there was not the least incitement to this massacre from the young Queen. This 
work has a wide circulation and is translated in other vernaculars in India, and so we think it 
unnecessary to repeat the argument once more. 
CHAPTER IX O U D H 
SINCE Dalhousie annexed Outh, the people of that province had been sinking deeper and 
deeper in misery. After Oudh lost her independence, all the offices of honour, power, and 
wealth in the Nabob’s Kingdom were given to Englishmen, and theSwadeshi men had to go 
to the well. The Nabob’s army was disbanded, his nobles were driven into poverty, his 
ministers and other officers lost their positions and were pushed to the low ranks of wage- 
earners; and all of them entertained a rankling hatred of the slavery which destroyed their 
country and reduced them to such a state. The sting of slavery was felt not alone in the capital 
and among the palace officials. The traditional rights of properties and Inams (fiefs) of the 
big Zemindars and Rajas were also confiscated by the English. So, all these Rajas and 
Zemindars saw how, between even a bad Swaraj (national rule) and subjection to a highly 
developed foreign rule, the former was to be preferred and was infinitely more agreeable and 
187 
honourable. The increase in the land-tax produced discontent among the peasants. Most of 
the Hindusthanee Sepoys in the English army were from Oudh, and the misery and slavery of 
the place of their birth soon made them intensely disaffected. Every one put his hand to the 
sword when he remembered how the English ruined Nabob Wajid Ali Shah with their cruel 
treachery and deceit. The big Zemindars of Oudh, were descendants of Rajput heroes. They 
were intensely excited when they heard of the perfidious cruelty of the English towards their 
King. After the annexation of Oudh, the English asked them to come and accept services 
under the new regime. Hundreds of the freedom-loving and valiant men replied, at that time: 
“We have eaten the food of Swaraj! We will not touch the foreigner’s food!” 
Sir Henry Lawrence was made the chief officer of the newOudh province. He was the elder 
brother of Sir John Lawrencde by whose alertness and statesmanship the seeds of the 
Revolution in the Panjab were smothered before taking root. Just as the Chief commissioner 
of the Panjab had saved that province, so also his brother in Oudh had begun his preparations 
to save this. If anyone deserves the credit of having materially helped to perpetuate British 
power in India in this Revolution, it is the Lawrence family. Sir Henry Lawrence, as soon as 
he stepped into Outh, really grasped the situation there and had expressed the fear of a 
Revolution, long before any other Englishman thought of it. Lucknow being the capital of 
Oudh province, Sir Henry had his headquarters there. He started the policy of pacifying 
disaffected Zemindars by sweet speeches. He took pains in organising a Durbar at Lucknow 
and in giving various honours, titles, and rewards, in order to make the people forget their 
late Swaraj. He was not unwise enough to rest content merely with applying pacificatory 
means, but also began to think out various plans for opposing a possible popular rising. For, 
though Sir Henry Lawrence was a better officer than his predecessors, the people in Oudh 
were heartily disgusted with English rule as such, whether good orbad. Their ambition could 
be satisfied with nothing less than the restoration of Swaraj and the reinstallation of Wajid 
Ali Shah on the throne. They had no other desire but to break the English chains and make 
Hindusthan free again. Their religion was yesterday the religion of the free. But yesterday, it 
was the religion of the state and the kind. Today, it had fallen to a secondary and a servile 
place. These were their chief complaints, and the remedy was not good rule by the English 
but the end of all English rule. Powerful Hindu chiefs, like Man Singh, and leaders of 
Mahomedans, like Moulvie Ahmad Shah, resolved to sacrifice their all in this war for 
freedom and the Hindu and Islamic religions. Thousands of Moulvies and Pundits began to 
wander all over Oudh, preaching sacred war, openly and secretly. The army took the oath; the 
police took the oath; the Zemindars took the oath; almost the whole populace joined in a vast 
188 
conspiracy to fight the English and the fire or popular agitation spread everywhere. It has 
been already told how sparks of this agitation would come forth, now and then, 
unintentionally. Moulvie Ahmad Shah himself was convicted of sedition and was given the death sentence which was later commuted. The 7th regiment was disarmed. Sir Henry Lawrence held a great Durbar on the 12th of May, in order to keep control over the Sepoys as 
far as possible. He then delivered there an eloquent oration in Hindusthanee. He fully dilated 
upon the importance of loyalty, the insults offered by Ranjit Singh to the Mahomedan 
religion, Aurangzeb’s insults to Hinduism, and the protection accorded by the English to both 
Hindus and Mahomedans against mutual injury. He then personally presented swords, 
shawls, turbans, and other presents to those Sepoys who had shown their loyalty; while, on the other side, the 7th regiment was being disarmed and disbanded. What an irony time had in 
store for him! In a very short time, these loyalists who got rewards had to be sentenced to be 
hanged on proof of their complicity with the Revolutionaries. 
The loyal Durbar was held on the 12th . On the 13th, the news came that Meerut had risen and, on the 14th, the people heard the joyful news that Delhi had fallen into the hands of the 
Revolutionaries and that a Proclamation had been issued of the freedom of Hindusthan. 
Sir Henry Lawrence now selected two places near Lucknow city, Machi Bhawan and the 
Residency, and began the work of fortifying these as places of refuge. The English women 
and children were taken there and all Englishmen, clerks, civil officials, and merchants were 
taught military drill, discipline, and the use of the rifle. At Meerut too, after the rising, all the 
civil Englishmen there had been given such training and made ready for the field in ten days. 
Sir Henry Lawrence was made the chief military officer of the province. Oudh being close to 
Nepal, Sir Henry Lawrence sent a mission to Nepal requesting help from there. He asked 
Jung Bahadur to come down into Oudh with an army. While these precautions were being 
taken, Sir Henry would get “reliable” information every day that there would be a rising that 
day. Daily, on receipt of the news, he would take special precautions; but the day would pass and no rising would take place. He was often thus deceived. On the 30th of May also, an 
officer informed Sir Henry that there was to be a rising that evening at nine o’clock. 
The sun set on the 30th. While Henry Lawrence was dining with his subordinates, the nine 
o’clock gun went off. Seeing that the man who had brought information this time was one 
who had provede a false prophet before, Henry Lawrence bent forward and said sarcastically, 
“Your friends are not punctual!” 
189 
Not punctual! Hardly had he finished the sentence, when he heard the crashing noise of the rifles of the 71st regiment. As previously settled amongst themselves, at the nine o’clock gun, 
a detachment of this regiment attacked the bungalows of the English. The mess-house of the 71st regiment was set on fire and the Englishment were fired at. Lieutenant Grant who was 
attempting to escape was hidden under a mattress by some one; but someone else gave the 
information to the Sepoys. He was dragged out and killed. While Lieutenant Hardinge was 
guarding some streets with his cavalry, he also received a sword-cut. The cantonment was on 
fire. Brigadier Handscomb was also killed. The English soldiers and a few Sepoys who stuck 
to the English flag were under arms all night, trying to check the spread of the rising as much as possible. On the morning of the 31st of May, Henry Lawrence marched on the 
Revolutionaries with the English soldiers under him and a few Sepoys who were still loyal to the English. But, on the way, the 7th cavalry regiment that was with him also rose. He left them to join the Revolutionaries and returned. Though the English had the whole of the 32nd regiment stationed at Lucknow, besides the artillery, before sunset, the 71st infantry, the 48th infantry, and the 7th cavalry regiment, together with the irregular troops, hoisted up the flag of 
freedom. 
At a distance of fifty-one miles to the north-west of Lucknow is the town of Sitapur. There werestationed here the 41st infantry and the 9th and 10th irregular infantries. At Sitapur also stayed the commissioner of the province and other big officials. On the 27th of May, some 
English houses had been set fire to. But the English had not yet the experience to know that 
those fires were the premonitory symptoms of the rising. They, therefore, did not give any 
special attention to it. Nay, more, even the Sepoys made great efforts to put down the flames! 
This fire served two purposes. One was that the members of the secret society got notice that 
the time had come. The other was to test the credulity and confidence of the English. On the 
2nd of June, an extraordinary incident occurred. The Sepoys complained that the flour bags 
given to them contained power of bones and refused to take them. They also insisted that they 
should be instantly thrown into the Ganges. The English quietly threw the bags into the river! 
In the afternoon of the same day, the Sepoys suddenly rushed into the gardens of the English 
and everyone helped himself to whatever fruit he liked and as much as he likes. The English 
officers protested vehemently, but the Sepoys did not stop in their repast to listen to the 
remonstrance! After the terrible feast, they began an equally terrible exercise in order to digest the food! On the 3rd of June, a batch of Sepoys went up to the treasury and captured it, 
and the rest went and attacked the house of the Chief Commissioner. On the way they met 
190 Colonel Birch and Lieutenant Graves and killed them. The 9th irregulars, also killed their 
officers. All the Sepoys would shout, “The Feringhi rule is at an end!” and fall upon any 
Englishman they met. The commissioner and his wife were running towards the river. He, his 
wife, and a boy were killed while crossing the river. Thornhill and his wife, also, fell a prey 
to bullets. The Sepoys in their rage killed about twenty-four English. Many others among the 
English, however, ran to the Zemindars of Ramkote, Mitavali, etc., enjoyed their hospitality 
for eight to ten months, and then were taken safely to Lucknow. All the Sepoys of Sitapur 
then went to Farrukabad. The fort there, in which the Englishmen had taken refuge, was taken 
after severe fighting and the Englishmen were massacred. Habob Tafuzar Hossein Khan was 
re-established on the Gadi which had been wrested away from him by the English. The Nabob, also, caught and killed every Englishman in his state. Thus, on the 1st of July, there 
was not a single Englishman left in the province of Farrukabad. In the town of Malan, about 
fourty-four miles to the north of Sitapur, the English officers had heard rumours of a 
conspiracy among the Sepoys and the people. When they also got the news of the rising at 
Sitapur, they ran away on their horses and, thus, the whole district became free without even 
a drop of blood being shed. 
The third district was Mahmadi. The English here had sent their familities to the Raja of 
Mithauli. The Raja saw them and told them that they must live secretly in his jungles, as he 
had no power to protect them openly. For, the Sepoys in the whole province of Oudh had 
taken oaths to rise. After sending away their wives to the Raja, the English officers at 
Mahmadi took themselves to the fort. On the same day, the English fugitives from 
Shahjahanpur in Rohilkhand arrived at Mahmadi. But there was not even a moment’s safety 
at Mahmadi and the officers sent a message to Sitapur to help these helpless Englishmen. 
Sitapur had not yet risen then and some Sepoys were sent with carriages to Mahmadi to fetch 
the refugees. But, the Sitapur Sepoys brought with them the seeds of the Revolution. They 
put all the English in carriages and took them safely till half-way to Sitapur; but there, they 
suddenly told them to get down and killed them. In this massacre, there were eight women, 
four children, eight lieutenants, four captains, and many others. The officers remaining at Mahmadi immediately ran away and the whole district was free from British rule on the 4th of 
June. 
Another district near Sitapur is Barhaitch. The chief officer here was Commissioner 
Wingfield. There were four administrative centres- Sikrora, Gonda, Barhaitch, and Melapore. Out of these, at Sikrora were stationed the 2nd infantry regiment and a battery of artillery. 
191 
When there were signs of a rising here, the English women and children were sent to Lucknow. On the morning of the 9th of June, many English officers voluntarily repaired to the 
Raja of Balarampur for refuge. Only the chief officer of the artillery, Bonham, retained his 
faith in the Sepoys and would not leave his post. But, in the evening, the Sepoys plainly told 
him that they did not wish to injure him personally but that they would not fight against their 
countrymen, because the English rule was at an end. At this, Bonham had to leave the station. 
The Sepoys showed him the safest way and he reached Lucknow safely. When the news of 
Sikrora’s independence reached Gonda, that town also rose for freedom. Then the 
commissioner, Wingfield, together with all the Englishmen ran for safety to the Raja of 
Balrampur. This Raja protected nearly twenty-five English people and sent them to an 
English camp at a suitable opportunity. 
The news of the liberty of Sikrora and Gonda soon reached Barhaitch. The English officers 
there, without waiting for a rising, left the chief town of the district and ran towards Lucknow, on the 10th of June. But, since the Revolutionaries had their out-posts at various 
places all over the province of Oudh, they disguised themselves as Indians and tried to cross 
the river Gogra in a boat. First, they did not attract any attention; but when half-way, there 
was a sudden cry of “Feringhi! Feringhi!!” The boatmen jumped away out of the boats and 
the English officers were killed. With these officers vanished the British power in Barhaitch. 
Though there was no military station at Melapore, still the popular outburst compelled the 
English officers to run away from the district. A Raje helped them as far as possible in their 
fight. But, soon, they fell victims partly to the swords of the Revolutionaries and partly to the 
hardships of the forest. 
Fyzabad was the chief town of the eastern part of Oudh and was also the residence of 
Commissioner Goldney of the province. In the province of Fyzabad, there were three 
districts, Sultanpur, Saloni, and Fyzabad. In the city of Fyzabad were stationed, at the time, the 22nd infantry, the 6th irregular infantry, some cavalry, and some artillery, all under the 
command of Colonel Lennox. In the district of Fyzabad, the oppression of the English 
government was at its worst. Sir Henry Lawrence himself writes, “The Talukdars have also, I 
fear, been hardly dealt with. At least in the Fyzabad district, they have lost half their villages, some Talukdars have lost all.”1 Immediately after the news of Meerut, the English officers at 
Fyzabad were afrait that this oppression would soon be avenged, and anxiety to save 
themselves took possession of their minds. They could not send their families to Lucknow, 
192 
because the road was thoroughly guarded by the Revolutionaries. They could not prepare to 
fight at Fyzabad, because the whole army there was composed of Indians. Finding themselves 
in this dilemma, these officers at last went to Raja Man Singh for protection. Raja Man Singh 
was the great leader of all the Hindus in the province of Oudh. His sword was always drawn 
to protect the Hindu religion under the Nabobs. In the may of 1857, this proud Raja had been 
imprisoned by the English for some begatelle about revenue. But, since the English had been 
weakened by the Meerut rising, they had released him in order to curry favour with him and 
gain him to their side. 
With very great difficulty, he consented to give reguge to English women and children in his 
castle. He still said that the people would not like his action and would not even scruple to attack his castle for it. On the 1st of June, however, the families of the English Officers went 
to Man Singh for refuge and lived safely in his Shahganj Castle. While the English were 
1. Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, p. 266. 
taking these measures of precaution, the Revolutionary fire began to burn brighter at 
Fyzabad. Moulvie Ahmad Shah, a name which finds a place now in Indian history, was one 
of the several Talukdars whose property had been confiscated by the English. He had taken 
the vow not only to get his Talukdari back but to free his country. Since the English annexed 
the kingdom of Oudh, Talukdar Ahmad Shah had given his all-in-all for the service of his 
country and religion. He became a Moulview and set out ona tour through Hindusthan to 
preach Revolution. Wherever this political saint went, there was seen an extraordinary 
awakening amongst the people. He personally saw the great leaders of the Revolutionary 
party. His voice was law in the royal family of Oudh. He formed a branch of the Secret 
Society at Agra. At Lucknow, he openly preached the destruction of the British power. He 
was beloved by the masses in Outh. With his body, his mind, his speech, and his intelligence, 
he worked incessantly in preaching freedom and weaving a perfect net of secret societies. He 
then took up the pen also. He wrote Revolutionary pamphlets and began to spread them 
broadcast in the province of Oudh. In one hand the sword and in the other the pen! Seeing 
this, the English ordered his arrest. But the Oudh police did not help to arrest the popular 
leader! So, a military force was sent to fetch him! He was tried for sedition, sentenced to be hanged, and detained for a time in the Fyzabad prison.2 The race began between the Moulvie 
and the English power to hang each other! While the Moulvie was preparing to hand the 
193 
English power, the latter was hurrying to erect a scaffold to hand the Moulvie. But, in the 
hurry, they retained the Moulvie in the Fyzabad prison and thus erected scaffolds for 
themselves. For the Moulvie’s arrest was the spark that set fire to and exploded the 
Revolutionary magazine at Fyzabad. The whole town, including the army, rose at once. 
2. “ Before the mutiny broke out, the Moulvie travelled through India, on a roving 
commission, to excite the minds of his compatriots to the steps then contemplated by the 
master spirits of the plot. Certain it is that, in 1857, he circulated seditious papers throughout 
Oudh; that the police did not arrest him; and, to obtain that end, armed force was required. He 
was then tried and condemned to death. But, before the sentence would be executed Oudh 
broke into revolt and, like many a political criminal in Europe, he stepped at once from the 
floor of a dungeon to the footsteps of a throne!”- Malleson, Vol. IV, page 379. Says 
Gubbins:- “The Moulvie of Fyzabad was released from jail by the mutineers. He came from 
Madras and was of a respectable Mahomedan family and had traversed much of upper India, 
exciting the people to sedition. He had been expelled from Agra for preaching sedition.” Etc. 
etc. 
When the English officers went to the parade ground to keep the Sepoys in order, the Sepoys 
on their part informed them boldly that thenceforth they would only obey the orders of 
Swadeshi officers and that their leader was the Subahdar Dhuleep Singh. Subahdar Dhuleep 
Singh then imprisoned the English officers; they were prohibited from going beyond a 
distance of twelve steps. Then, the townsmen and the Sepoys ran to the prison which had 
been sanctified by the feet of the popular hero. The door of the prison creaked and amidst the 
loving shouts of the populace, the Moulvie Ahmad Shah threw away the chains which had 
now been broken to pieces and walked up to the crowd! This was the Moulvie’s rebirth! The 
English power which was about to hang him was itself hanged by him at last! As soon as he 
was released, he accepted the leadership of the Revolution at Fyzabad, and the first thing 
which he did in revenge for the sentence of death passed on him, was to send a message to 
Colonel Lennox, now kept under guard, thanking him for his permission to allow the use of a Hookah while he was in prison.3 
After thanking for the gift of a Hookah the man who gave him the death sentence, the noble- 
souled Moulvie warned the English officers to leave Fyzabad immediately. To prevent 
looting and disorder at Fyzabad, as happened in some other places, detachments of Sepoys 
were sent out as guards. The arsenal and other public buildings were also guarded by Sepoys. 
194 
The Sepoys of the 15th regiment elected a committee of war which resolved that the English 
officers should be killed. But the chief officersdecided that the first promise should not be 
broken and so they let them go away alive. They were even informed that they might take 
with them all private property, but no public property as that belonged to the King of Oudh! 
Thereafter, the Revolutionaries themselves got boats ready for the English and gave them 
some money; then the officers took leave of all the Sepoys and went away along the Gogra in boats. On the morning of the 9th of June, a Proclamation was issued that Fyzabad had become 
independent, that the Company’s rule was at an end, and Wajid Ali Shah had recommended 
to rule! 
While the English were floating along in the boats, the Sepoys of the 17th regiment saw them. 
They had received a letter from Fyzabad Sepoys asking them to kill all the Englishmen 
coming from there. The attack on the boats commenced. The chief commissioner, Goldney, 
was killed; so also Lieutenant Thomas, Ritchie, Mill, Edwardes, Currie and others. Those that 
3. Charlkes Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 394. 
went to the town of Mohadaba were killed by the police themselves. Only one boat and its 
occupants concealed themselves successfully till the end and reached the English camp safely 
with the help of the boat-men. While Raja Man Singh’s household was anxious about the 
safety of English women and children given in his charge, many more men came there again 
for refuge. Man Singh was, at the time, at the chief city of Oudh. He wrote home that he had 
just made an agreement with the Revolutionaries by which they allowed him to give shelter 
to women and children, provided that he did not take there any Englishmen, and that it had 
been decided that his house should be searched to see whether he observed the conditions. 
Therefore, the Englishmen in his fort, with their families, left to cross the river Gogra. They 
encountered many dangers and hardships on the way and those of them that survived arrived 
safely at the house of the Raja of Gopalpur. That, Raja entertained the twenty-nine English 
with great hospitality, for some days, and then sent them safely to the English camp. Most of 
the Englishmen who escaped in the trials of 1857 have written long accounts of their 
experiences. They are all very instructive and are a living monument to the nobility of 
sentiment of the people of our nation. Though there was so much hatred all over Oudh 
against the English, they were entertained hospitably, when they surrendered, even in the 
houses of those Rajas who fought on the side of the Revolutionaries. And such examples are 
not isolated. Busher writes “ Now, I alone remained. Running on, I came across a village on 
195 
the way. The first man I was there was a Brahmin. I asked of him some water to drink. He 
saw my misery and took pity on me and told me that that village consisted of Brahmins and 
that my life was safe... Buli Singh came up in pursuit. I ran into a gully when an old woman 
came up to me and pointed out a cottage. I went in and hid myself in the grass. Shortly after 
came Buli Singh’s men and began to pierce everywhere with the ends of their swords to find 
me. They soon found me and dragged me out by my hair. The people in the village began to 
heap curses on the Feringhis! The, Buli Singh conducted me to another place, amidst the 
hootings of the village crowd. My execution was postponed everyday. I fell on my knees and 
craved for mercy. In this way, I was taken, at last, to Buli Singh’s house.” After a long time, 
he was sent away to the English. Colonel Lennox writes : “While we were running, the men 
of Nazim Hossein Khan caught us. One of them drew out his revolver, gnashed his teeth and 
said that his hands were throbbing to despatch the Feringhis away in an instant but that he 
could not do it! We were next taken up to Nazim. He was sitting in the Durbar leaning on a 
cushion. He told us to drink a little sherbet and rest, and not to be frightened. When the 
question arose as to what quarters should be given to us, an angry servant suggested the 
horse-stables near by. Nazim rebuked him for this, but immediately another broke forth, 
‘Why all this trouble? I will just kill these Feringhi dogs!’ Nazim thundered against them all 
and promised us our lives. We hid near the Zenana through fear of the mutineers. We got 
good food, clothing, and rest.” Then, Nazim disguised all these as Indians and sent them 
safely to the English camp. 
As soon as the English officers left the city of Fyzabad, the other districts in the province also hoisted the flag of freedom. Sultanpur rose on the same day, i.e. the 9th of June. The third district town, Saloni, rose on the 10th. The officers of the latter place were running for their 
lives. The Sirdar Rustom Shah saved some of them, and Raja Hanumant Singh also saved 
some. The gallant and brave princes of Oudh did not rest content merely by sparing the lives 
of those who surrendered but also entertained the English most hospitably. As a matter of 
fact, the English had inflicted terrible losses on, and offered great insults to, almost all these 
Zemindars. Not that the Zemindars ever forgot that their Swaraj had been destroyed and their 
religion was trodden under foot. Followed by their Sepoys, they were openly warring against 
the English and many had taken oaths never to rest until the English were out of the country. 
But, to match this heroic patriotism and love of freedom, they all showed equally heroic 
gallantry. While the common people were massacring the English in a fit of rage and 
revenge, they treated the English women and children hospitably and showed them 
clemency! Even those officers who had but now persecuted them were given their lives, 
196 
when they came to surrender! Though the mass of the people insisted that it was not desirable 
to leave the officers, for they might again come to fight – as the officers did in the latter part 
of the war – they did not shrink from showing them generosity! In how many other countries 
except in India can be found, in Revolutionary times, this gallantry and this nobility of heart, 
even when it enraged the masses? 
Raja Hanamant Singh was the chief of Kala and, though not behind anybody in his anxiety to 
fight in the cause of his nation, his nobility forced even his enemies to speak of him in the 
following terms: “This noble Rajpur had been dispossessed, by the action of the revenue 
system introduced by the British, of the greater part of his property. Keenly as he felt the 
tyranny and the disgrace, his noble nature yet declined to regard the fugitive chiefs of the 
nation which had nearly ruined him in any other light than as people in distress. He helped 
them in that distress; he saw them in safety to their own fortress. But when, on bidding him 
farewell, Captain Barrow expressed a hope that he would aid in suppressing the revolt, he 
stood erect, as he replied, ‘Sahib, your countrymen came into our country and drove out our 
king. You sent your officers round the districts to examine the titles of the estates. At one 
blow, you took from me lands which, from time immemorial, had been in my family. I 
submitted. Suddenly misfortune fell upon you. You came to me whom you had depoiled. I 
have saves you. But now, - now I march at the head of my retainers to Lucknow to try and drive you from the country.”4 
This generosity on the part of the people of Oudh was not a sign of weakness. Between the 31st of May and the end of the first week of June, the whole province rose ion Revolution like 
a big machine suddenly setting to work! In the whole province, the Zemindars, Jagirdars, and 
Rajas; the thousands of Sepoys under the British – infantry, cavalry, and artillery; all the 
servants of the civil departments; peasants, merchants, and studednts; in short all, whether 
Hindu or Mahomedan, rose like one man for freeing their country. Private enmity, differences 
of religion and caste and rank were all forgotten. Every one felt in his heart that he was 
jumping into the battlefield for a war of justice. It was the masses who re-established Wajid 
Ali Shah on the throne of Oudh in ten days. What a statesmanlike answer this to Dalhousie’s 
contention that he deposed Wajid Ali Shah for the good of the people! At the end of the first 
week of June, there was scarcely a village in the whole Oudh province that had not given 
such a statesmanlike reply to Dalhousie, by tearing to pieces the English flag! 
197 
After giving a true picture of this state of things, the famous historical researcher, Forrest, 
says in his preface, “Thus in the course of ten days, the English administration in Oudh 
vanished like a dream and left not a wreck behind. The troops mutinied, the people threw off 
their allegiance. But there was no revenge, no cruelty. The brave and turbulent population, 
with a few exceptions, treated the fugitives of the ruling race with marked kindness, and the 
high courtesy and chivalry of the people of Oudh was conspicuous in their dealings with their 
fallen masters who, in the days of their power, had, from the best (?) of motives, inflicted on many of them a grave wrong.” 5 If the experienced and able English officers had not been 
thus spared by the heroic nobility of the people of Oudh, Oudh could not have been 
reconquered merely by the English novices! For, as we shall see later on these were English 
officers and were returned with the new forces sent by the English and wreaked terrible 
vengeance on the Revolutionary leaders and followers who had, through misplaced 
generosity saved their lives as shown above! About the 10th of June, the whole province of Oudh became independednt and all the Sepoys 
and volunteers marched towards Lucknow. In that city, the great English leader, Henry 
4. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, page 273 (foot-note) 
5. Forrest’s State Papers, Vol. II, page 37. 
Lawrence, was moving heaven and earth to inspire life into the dying English power. Though 
he had lost the whole province, he had still kept his hold on the capital. He had smelt the 
Revolution from afar and had fortified the two places, Machi Bhawan and the Residency, as has been already mentioned. When the Sepoys revolted on the 31st of May and went away, 
Lawrence formed a splendid regiment of Sikhs and another of the “most loyal” Hindusthanees. The remaining division of the old Sepoy army had rebelled before the 12th of 
June. This revolt pleased Sir Henry in a way, for now he had with him a select and faithful 
army consisting of the English regiment and artillery and the two regiments of Sikhs and 
Hindusthanees, whose loyalty to the English had been proved by severe tests. Sir, Henry was 
now waiting, ready to give battle. 
The Depoys and young fighting men of the province of Oudh were collecting together around 
the city of Lucknow. Both sides, before commencing the fight, were awaiting the issue of 
another struggle. The siege of Cawnpore was at its height, and neither the English nor the 
Revolutionaries started the battle until the final news from Cawnpore came. Each party based its hopes on the result of Cawnpore. Sir Henry wrote hopefully to Loard Canning, on the 23rd 
of June, “If Cawnpore stands, it is doubtful whether Lucknow will be besieged at all.” On the 
198 
28th, the news came to Lucknow that not a single Englishman was left alive at Cawnpore! 
The Revolutionaries were flushed with the victory and marched up to Chinhut to attack the 
English. 
The terrible defeat of the English at Cawnpore shook the basis of English prestige 
everywhere. Sir Henry Lawrence thought that, unless this defeat were counteracted, not only 
the Residency at Lucknow but even Fort William of Calcutta would not be safe, and resolved 
to wash away the insult of Cawnpore with the blood of the Revolutionaries. The English army assembled near the iron bridge, on the 29th June. Sir Henry left Lucknow with four 
hundred English soldiers, four hundred traitor Sepoys and ten guns. He marched a long 
distance without seeing any sign of the enemy. At last, he came across the front rank of the 
Revolutionaries. Sir Henry, then, ordered his sepoys to take a very important village on his 
right. The sepoys attacked that village and it fell into the hands of the English. The English 
soldiers, also, took the village of Ismailganj on the left. The Indian and English officers of the 
guns rained such a fire against the guns of the Revolutionaries that the latter was silenced. 
The English almost won the day at Chinhut. But, suddenly the cry arose that the 
Revolutionaries had entered unobserved the village on the left; the English soldiers were 
suddenly attacked and driven out, and the village was captured by the Revolutionaries, who 
now attacked the English centre and rear. As the English soldiers retired, the Revolutionaries 
rushed on. There was confusion in the English ranks and Sir Henry, seeing that a further 
stand would result in the ruin of the whole army, sounded a retreat! During the retreat the 
English suffered excessive hardships; for, the Revolutionaries did not stop with the victory of 
Chinhut but started a hot pursuit. The Sepoys manning the English artillery now began to 
slack. But the rest of the Indian cavalry and artillery showed even greater bravery than the 
English soldiers and ably covered the retreat. But, in a short time, the retreat ended in a rout! 
The despairing English army began to run towards Lucknow. Out of the four hundred English 
soldiers, nearly one hundred and fifty died that day. We need not count the Indian loyalists! 
The English left on the field two guns and a big howitzer. They had in this manner, Sir Henry 
re-entered the Residency at Lucknow. Still the Revolutionaries were following him. When 
the English and the Sikhs and other loyalists came within the shelter of the guns at the 
Residency, the battle of Chinhut came to an end. But, its results still remained. The 
Revolutionaries now surrounded both Machi Bhawan and the Residency. Sir Henry, 
therefore, decided to vacate Machi Bhavan in order to render his defence more effective. The 
arsenal there, containing a large quantity of ammunition, was blown up, and all the 
Englishmen now came into the Residency. This Residency had enough stores of provisions, 
199 
arms, and ammunition to stand a siege. There were now, in the Residency, about a thousand 
Englishmen and eight hundred Indian sepoys. They prepared to defend themselves against the 
vast number of Revolutionaries collecting outside. Seeing the preparations of the English 
general to defend the Residency after the battle of Chinhut, the Revolutionaries commenced a 
regular siege. Thousands of the Revolutionaries were mustering strong and chafing to put an 
end to the slavery and foreign domination. 
In this manner, the enraged Ayodhya beat and pursued and imprisoned the English Power in this little Residency of Lucknow.6 
6. The well-known writer of the Red Pamphlet says :- “All Oudh has been in arms 
against us. Not only the regular troops but sixty thousand men of the army of the ex-kind, the 
Zemindars, and their retainers, the two hundred and fifty forts- most of them heavily armed 
with guns – have been working against us. They have balanced the rule of the Company with 
the sovereignty of their own kings and have pronounced, almosg unanimously, in favour of 
the latter. The very pensioners who have served in the army have declared against us and to a 
man joined in the insurrection.” 
CHAPTER X THE SUMMING UP 
WHAT effect had this spirit of freedom which inspired life in the dead or dying thrones of 
Delhi, Cawnpore, Lucknow, and Bareilly on the other states which were still, more or less, 
living? 
The mass of the people, in 1857, had thoroughly understood that, so long as foreign 
domination over Hindusthan remained, the living states were as useless as the dead ones were 
lifeless. The Revolution in 1857, inspired by the holiest and the highest ideal of freedom, was 
not fighting furiously for the sake of this king or that heir. Individuals – peasants or kings – 
may live or die, but the nation should not die, must not die. The ideal was the establishment 
of the country’s freedom by breaking the dreadful chains of slavery, and the universal war 
was sounded for the attainment of this noble end, even though the way to it was over the 
200 ashes of cottages and of thrones. He is a king who would free his country. The other kings 
were as well dead as alive. 
The people in the states like Gwalior, Indore, Rajpootana, and Bharatpur were, also, full of 
the spirit of the Revolutionary War, as much as those in territories which had completely lost 
their independence. None of them entertained the sordid idea of keeping away from risk and 
danger, because his own native state was safe; nor looked upon his own tiny state as the 
whole nation, and upon the annexed provinces as people having exclusive interests and 
belonging to a foreign system. Foreigner! One son of the Mother, a foreigner to another! No; 
1857 has come and all India is one; one in life; one in destiny! 
Now, then,. You Scindia of Gwalior! Give us the order to fight against the English. Give us 
not only the order but come and be our leader; Raise the holy cry of “Swadesh” and 
“Swadharma” on the battlefield and march on with the army to complete the half-done work 
of Mahadaji. The whole country is hanging on the one word of Jayaji Scindia! Say “War!”, 
and Agra falls, Delhi is liberated, the Dekhan rises amidst thunder, the foreigner is expelled 
from the country, the land is free, and you are the man who shall give it the gift of freedom! 
The lives of two hundred millions of men depended on the tongue of one man. Such an 
occasion is verily Historical! 
But, the one tongue of the Scindia first would not move at all and, when it did move, it said 
“Friendship!” instead of “War!” The Scindia resolved to preserve his friendship – not with 
the country but with the English! At this, the people rose in a fury. If the Scindia does not 
wish to fight, we shall fight! If you do not run to save the Motherland, we will run to liberate her without you, and, if it comes to that, in spite of you. To-day is Sunday, the 14th of June. 
We have waited for the Scindia till to-day. We will only wait for the sun to set to-day; when 
the sun sets – Har! Har, Mahadev! Who is there driving in that carriage? Mr. And Mrs. Coopland. How dare anyone salaam to them? Salaam a Feringhi after the 14th of June? Not 
only this Feringhi but, see there, the brigadier is coming, and no one raises his hand or moves 
his head to salute him! Brigadier, indeed! But who made him brigadier? Is it not the 
Feringhis? A crow, though standing at the top of a palace, does not become an eagle. So, 
march on right in the fact of the brigadier and pay no attention to him. And so, the Sepoys of the Gwalior contingent passed the brigadier without salutimg him.1 Still there was no 
disturbance till the evening. In the evening, one bungalow took fire. Yes; now comes the time 
of rising. Artillery! rise in revolt! Infantry! Take burning torches in one hand and shining 
201 
swords in the other and dance about in all directions, roaring like lions. See the colour of 
every man you meet in the street; if he is dark, embrace him; if white, kill him. 
Maro Feringhiko! You are hidnig in the house; all right, we will set fire to it! Who is this 
running out of the bungalow to save himself from the fire? Is he a white man? Cut his head 
off! Who is this again? A white woman “Mat Maro! Mat Maro!” (Don’t kill!) “We do not want to kill women!”2 The whole night, the ghostly dance is going on. There must be no 
Englishman in Gwalior, not even in the Scindia’s palace. The white men were driven out of 
the Scindia’s dominions – right up to Agra. The white women were collected together and put 
in prison. But, it is improper not to speak to them. See there an English woman suffering in 
the sun. Let us speak to her. So, one man asks her, “Well, madam, how do you like the sun of 
this place? Is it not too hot? You are feeling it very much just now – are you? If you had 
remained in your own cold country, there would have been no such difficulty for you!” After 
listening to this “devilish” bit of advice given to this woman, listen to what another to them 
says : “What, you want to be sent to Agra? Ha, ha! Your people have been killed long ago 
and Agra now belongs to the Revolutionaries. Do you still wish to go there?” And so arose a 
wave of mirthful laughter. The Scindia was made lifeless like a dummy; the Gwalior 
1. Mrs. Coopland’s Narrative. 
2. Mrs. Coopland’s Narrative. 
Contingent foces revolted, split the blood of their officers, drove out English women, the 
English flag, and English power out of the limits of Gwalior state ande made Gwalior 
perfectly independent. They next began to order the Scindia : “Come and be our leader; come 
out with the whole army towards Agra, Cawnpore and Delhi to liberate Hindusthan!” Scindia 
kept them quiet for many days by constant promises. Until Tatia Tope comes secretly to Gwalior and leads them, the troops are to remain thus inactive.3 
And, therefore it is that the English at Agra have still some hope. For the Lieutenant- 
Governor of the North-Western Province Mr. Colvin, is at Agra, standing in terror of death 
every minute. He had previously delivered a lecture on “loyalty” to Sepoys, agitated by the 
Meerut news. He had issued a proclamation of pardon! But there was not even a single Sepoy 
weak-minded enough to come to beg his pardon; nay, more, as a reply to the proclamation of pardon, they attacked Agra on the 5th of July. The revolted regiments of Nasirabad and 
Neemuch marched on Agra; so, the “loyal” troops of the rulers of Bitaoli and Bharatpur were 
sent against them! The troops sent by these states declared that though they would refrain 
202 
from rising against the English, for such were the orders of their rulers, they would not lift 
their swords against their own countrymen!” The English were thus deceived and 
disappointed. The native states were “loyal”; but their people and armies “would not lift their 
swords against their countrymen!” So taking with him the English troops alone, Brigadier 
Polwhele marched upon the Revolutionaries coming to attack Agra. Both armies met near 
Sassiah and the battle lasted the whole day; at last, the English force found it impossible to 
3. “It was a most favourable moment for recovering his lost authority. It was merely 
necessary to accede to the proposal of the mutinous contingents and to revenge himself on the 
British. Had he so acceded, had he put himself at their head and, accompanied likewise by his 
trusty Mahrattas, proceeded to the scene of action, the consequences would have been most 
disastrous to ourselves. He would have brought at least twenty thousand troops, one half of 
them drilled and disciplined by European officers, on our weak points. Agra and Lucknow 
would have at once fallen. Havelock would have been shut up in Allahabad; and either that 
fortress would have been besieged or the rebels, giving it a wide berth, would have marched 
through Benares on to Calcutta. There were no troops, no fortification to stop them.” – Red 
Pamphlet, page 194. 
stand the attack of the Revolutionaries, and retired. The Revolutionaries, flushed with victory, 
pursued them hotly. When the army entered Agra, the Revolutionaries were at their heels with shouts of victory. Agra got the opportunity it wanted. It was the 6th of July. The town of 
Agra rose in revolt, headed by the police. The police officers were all in concert with the 
Revolutionary society. The religious leaders of both Hindus and Mahomedans organised a 
great procession. The Kotwal and other police officers walked in the front line. They raised 
shouts of victory for Swadharma and Swaraj and proclaimed that the English rule was at an 
end and that the authority had been transferred to the Emperor of Delhi! 
When Agra thus became free, Mr. Colvin, together with all the English there – ashamed of 
the defeat and anxious for the future – retired into the fort. He had now one great fear, and 
that was about the side that the Scindia would take. The mere news that the Scindia had 
joined the Revolutionaries would have made Mr. Colvin surrender that impregnable fort! But 
as it was clear that the Scindia was not against him, as was proved by his “loyal” letters and 
help, the English flag at Agra seemed to revive. But the weight of supporting it was too much 
203 
and Mr.Colvin died on the 9th of September, 1857, to the deepest sorrow of the English 
government in India. 
The Revolutionary spirit that exhibited itself among the masses and the Sepoys at Gwalior 
had also burst forth in a terrible manner at Indore. Secret communication was established 
between all the troops in the English camp at Mhow and the troops of Holkar, and a rebellion was decided upon. On the 1st of July, Saadat Khan, a Mahomedan nobleman at the Indore 
court, ordered the army to fall upon the English at the Residency. He declared that the 
Maharaja Holkar had given him the order. But the Indian troops did not need any such 
declaration, even. They raised the flag of freedom and, at once, marched with their guns on 
the Residency. The Indian troops at the Residency refused to fire on their countrymen on 
behalf of the English. The English lost all hope; they quietly packed their bag and baggage 
and fled from Indore. The Indian troops at the Residency had guaranteed them their lives and 
protected them till the end. English authors always trry hard to find out exactly whether the 
Maharaja Holkar sympathised with the English or with the Revolutionaries. But one who 
minutely studies the history and the conditions of 1857 would see at once that during the 
Revolution, most of the states had purposely observed a dubious attitude. The desire of 
freedom is innate in man. Most of the states intended to raise the flag of freedom as soon as 
there was reasonable prospect of the success of Revolution. They did not join the English, 
because they did not want to aid in the failure of the Revolution. On the other hand, they did 
not want, by actively helping the Revolutionaries, to give a handle to the English, if they 
should be able to overpower the Revolutionaries, to confiscate their estates. Thus, they 
provided for the other alternative of the Company coming out victorious. Fools that they 
were, not to be able to see that, if they joined the Revolutionaries, there was absolutely no 
chance for the English to succeed; while, if they remained neutral, the chances of the success 
of the Revolution were greatly lessened! This is the real explanation of the conduct of most of 
the states in this critical period. If the people and the troops drove out the English from the 
Residencies, they were permitted to do so; because, it meant the freedom of the states. 
Notwithstanding this, the rulers would continue to declare their friendship for the English, so 
that, in case of English success, they should not lose what they had. It would seem that Cutch, 
Gwalior, Indore, Bundela, Rajputana, and other states – all behaved in this manner. 
And it was this selfish conduct on the part of the princes which, in the end, strangled the 
Revolution. If they had boldly come forward, crying “Freedom – or Death!” , they would 
certainly have obtained freedom. But they played a double-game – the result of mean 
204 
selfishness. Their good intentions, being weak, achieved nothing and their baseness was 
conspicuous! They were not open and bare-faced traitors to the country like Patiala and 
others; but they played, indirectly, the part of traitors: they let base selfishness take 
possession of their souls, even while hoping for the noble goal of freedom and, hence, they 
are cursed for their sin. When will they wash it away? 
But these selfish motives which mastered the minds of the princes did not enter for a single 
moment the hearts of the people. And it was by their glorious onslaughts from Peshawar up 
to Calcutta that the fire broke forth and blood began to flow, in order to reduce to ashes and 
wash away the terrible curse of slavery which had smitten the land. And it was by their united 
strength and unselfish fight that English power collapsed and was grounded into dust, for some time at least.4 
4. Wherever the chiefs of the native states hesitated to join the revolution, the people of the states 
became uncontrollable and tried to throw off the yoke even of their own chief, if he would not join the nation’s 
war. Seeing this extraordinary upheaval of the populace, Malleson says : “Here, too, as at Gwalior, as at Indore, 
it was plainly shown that, whe the fanaticism of the oriental people is thoroughly roused, not even their kind, 
their Raja – their father, as all consider him, their God, as some delight to style him – not even their Raja can 
bend them against their convictions.” The Sepoys of trhe Rajas of Jaipur and Jodhpur refused point blank to 
raise their hands against their countrymen who were fighting for the nation, even when asked by their Raja to do 
so. Malleson’s Indian Munity, Vol. III, p. 172 How little Calcutta and England understood the nature of this terrible earthquake! In the 
opinion of the Government, there was perfect peace before the Meerut rising. Even when 
Meerut rose and the Proclamation of freedom was issued from Delhi, Calcutta could not 
understand the real meaning of the eruption. Seeing that no wave of the rising appeared between the 10th and 31st of May, Calcutta was confirmed in its idea that there was no serious trouble in Hindusthan. On the 25th of May, the Home Secretary proclaimed openly: “There is 
perfect peace within a radius of six hundred miles from Calcutta. The momentary and 
isolated danger is passed. And it is strongly hoped that, in a few days, perfect peace and 
safety will reign.” 
The “few days” passed; the 31st of May dawned. “Peace and safety” reigned everywhere! 
Around the Lucknow Residency, in the Cawnpore Maidan, in the Jogan Bagh at Jhansi, in the 
bazaars of Allahabad, on the Ghats of Benares, everywhere “peace and safety” reigned! 
Telegraph wires cut to pieces, railways and iron bridges smashed and mixed into dust, 
205 
English corpses floating in rivers, pools of blood in the streets – everywhere “peace and 
safety!” 
It was then, that the fog at Calcutta cleared. On the 12th of June, all the English residents 
began to organize a corps of volunteers. English shopkeepers, clerks, writers, civil officers, - 
in short, all Englishmen were hastily enrolled in the military list; they wee taught drill and 
rifle practice. The work was done so quickly and energetically that, in three weeks, a while 
brigade of the newly-drilled volunteer recruits was formed. The brigade consisted of cavalry, 
infantry, and artillery; since they were thought capable of protecting Calcutta, that work was 
given to them; and the Government got the opportunity of sending the professional English 
soldiers to parts where the Revolution was in full swing. 
On the 13th of June, Lord Canning called a meeting of the legislative council and got a law 
passed against newspapers. For, as soon as the Revolution began, the Indian newspapers of 
Bengal had begun to write articles openly sympathising with and encouraging the Revolution. 
On Sunday, the 14th of June, a carnival of “pease and safety” was celebrated at Calcutta, 
also. We shall describe that day’s scenes best through an English pen. “All was panic, 
disorder, and dismay. The wildest reports were in circulation. It was all but universally 
credited that the Barrackpore brigade was in full march on Calcutta, that the people in the 
Suburbs had already risen, that the kind of Outh with his followers was plundering Garden 
Reach. Those highest in office were the first to give the alarm. There were secretaries to 
Government, running over to Members of Council, loading their pistols, barricading the 
doors, sleeping on sofas; Members of Council abandoning their houses with their families, 
and taking refuge on board the ship; crowds of lesser celebrities impelled by these examples 
having hastily collected their valuables, were rushing to the fort, only too happy to be 
permitted to sleep under the fort guns. Horses, carriages, palanquins, vehicles of every sort 
and kind were put into requisition to convey panic-stricken fugitives out of the reach of 
imaginary cut-throats. In the suburbs, almost every house belonging to the Christian 
population was abandoned. Half-a-dozen determined fanatics could have burned down three parts of the town....”5 
In the very capital of the English, merely at a bazaar rumour, so much “pease and safety” 
began to reign. Therefore, the Government prepared to destroy the Barrackpore Sepoys and 
the Nabob of Oudh, who were the cause of so much “pease and safety”. They got, from one 
206 
amongst the Sepoys, the information that the Barrackpore Sepoys would rise on the nigt of the 14th. So, before they could rise, they were brought before the English artillery and disarmed. And, on the 15th of June, the Nabob of Oudh and his minister were arrested for the 
“safety of the realm”, and their houses, including the Zenana, were thoroughly searched. And, 
though nothing of an incriminating nature was found, the Nabob and his Vizier were 
incarcerated in the Calcutta fort. Thus, the gradually accumulating powder-magazine of the 
city of Calcutta itself was emptied, only just before the spark fell on it. 
The Vizier Ali Nakkhi Khan was the man who, residing in a harmless garden-house at 
Calcutta, had set on foot the Revolutionary secret organisation among the Sepoys all over 
Bengal and had woven the terrible net in order to re-establish his master on the throne of 
Oudh. When he was imprisoned in the Calcutta fort, the Revolution lost, as it were, its head. 
While in the fort, he once spoke plainly to the English who were cursing the Revolutionaries: 
“The terrible Revolution created in India is in my opinion just. It is a proper revenge for the 
annexation of Oudh. You have consciously left the royal road of justice and have entered the 
thorny path of deceit and selfishness. What wonder, then, that your feet are bleeding by the 
self-same thorns? You were laughing when you sowed the seeds of revenge; why do you, 
5. Red Pamphlet, page 105. 
then, blame the people when the self-same seeds have borne fruit in due course?” 6 
When Calcutta itself had such a hazy and misty idea of the extent of the Revolutionary 
movement, we can easily understand how England, which depended for its information solely 
on the main news from India, at first slept the sleep of ignorance, and then, when suddenly 
awakened, became possessed by terror and behaved like a madman. When the news of 
Barrackpore, Berhampore, Dum-Dum, and other places reached England, all eyes were 
turned towards India. But soon, everything became quiet and all began to feel safe again. On the 11th of June, the President of the Board of Trade said, in reply toa question in the House 
of Commons, “There is now no reason for anxiety as regards the late unrest in Bengal. For, 
by the dexterity, firmness, and quickness of my honourable and noble friend, Lord Canning, 
the seeds of unrest sown in the army have been completely rooted out.” These are the sentences which the Parliament heard on the 11th of June. On that date in India, elevan 
cavalry regiments, five field-batteries of artillery, at least fifty regiments of infantry, and 
207 
nearly all the sappers and miners had risen in open revolt! The whole of Oudh was in the 
hands of Revolutionaries! Cawnpore and Lucknow were besieged! The Revolutionaries had 
taken more than ten millions of Rupees from Government treasuries; and all this, at the 
moment when, owing to the dexterity, firmness, and quickness of Loard Canning, “the seeds 
of unrest had been completed rooted out.” 
But soon, the news of the extraordinary and sudden growth of these seeds of Revolution 
again disturbed England’s sleep. The news about the Cawnpore massacres somehow reached the people and on the 14th of August, 1857, the unhappy, terror-stricken, and agitated masses 
caused a question to be put in the Parliament, in the House of Lords, “Is the rumour about 
Cawnpore true?” Earl Granvile replied : “I have received a personal letter from General Sir 
Patrick Grant that the rumous about the massacres at Cawnpore is altogether untrue and is a 
vile fabrication. A Sepoy first set up the rumour. Not only in his baseness discovered but he has been hanged for spreading the false rumour.”7 While the rumour about Cawnpore was 
being discussed in the House of Lords, a month had already passed since the “truth” had been 
written in grim letters of red blood! While English politicians were resting a little in safety, 
after hanging the Sepoy who started the rumour, the truth came in person to the shores of 
6. Red Pamphlet. 
7. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny. 
England. And the whole of England became mad and hysterical with anger, fury, wounded 
pride, and this malicious futy continues up to this day. And England is shouting, even to-day, 
in every line of her own histories, that the massacres committed by the Revolutionaries are 
demoniacal in their cruelty and are a blot on the fair name of Humanity! 
And this loud shouting by the English at the top of their voice has made the whole world 
deaf! The very name of 1857 brings a shiver and horripilation and shame to everybody! The 
very mention of the name of the Revolutionaries of 1857 creates disgust and loathing in the 
minds not only of their enemies, not only of innocent and indifferent third parties, but even of 
those for whose sake the Martyrs shed their blood! Their enemies give them choice epithets 
like ‘demons’, ‘goblins’, ‘blood-thirsty and hellish vermin’. The strangers call them savage, 
inhuman, cruel, and barbarous. Their own countrymen are ashamed even to own them. Such 
is the cry everywhere even today. And this incessant cry has deafened the ears of the whole 
208 
world so that they should not any more listen to the voice of truth! The Revolutionaries are 
demons, goblins, murderers of women and children, blood-thirsty vermin of hell, inhuman. 
Oh World! When will you forget this and understand the truth? 
Any why all this? Why? Because, the Revolutionaries rose against the English, rose for their 
country and religion, and, with shouts of “Revenge!”, massacred some of them. 
Indiscriminate massacre is a heinous sin. When Humanity will reach the goal of universal 
justice, of ultimate beatitude, when the millennium preached by the incarnations, by the 
Messiahs, and by religious preachers will be an accomplished fact on earth, when the 
resignation taught by Christ in the glorious words – “Whosoever shall smite thee on the right 
cheek, turn to him the other, also” will be impracticable, because, there will be no one to hit 
on the right cheek, in such a divine age if anyone revolts, if anyone sheds a drop of blood, if 
anyone even whispers the word “Revenge!”, then, at once, the sinner, by this act, by his very 
utterance, would be eternally damned. For, when Truth reigns in every heart, revolt must be a 
heinous sin. When everyone abhors killing, to shed a drop of blood must be a sin. In a time of 
such unchallenged justice, to punish a man even for uttering a sinful word would be 
altogether blameless. 
But so long as that divine age has not arrived, so long as the highly auspicious end remains 
only in the lines of saintly poets and in the prophecies of the divinely inspired, and so long as, 
even to make that state of universal justice possible, the human mind has to be busy 
eradicating sinful and aggressive tendencies, so long, rebellion, bloodshed, and revenge 
cannot be purely sinful. As long as the word “rule” is used for “authority” both just and 
unjust, so long its antonym “rebellion” can, also, be just as well as unjust. And till then, 
before passing judment on the history and the authors of any revolt, bloodshed, and revenge, 
there must be a full and minute inquiry of the circumstances under which they took place. 
Revolt, bloodshed and revenge have often been instruments created by nature to root out 
injustice and introduce an era of justice. And when Justice uses these terrible means for her 
salvation, the blame of it does not lie on Justice but on the preceding cruel Injustice, the 
power and insolence of which called forth the means. We do not hold the justice which gives 
the death sentence responsible for bloodshed but rather the injustice which is taken to the 
gallows. Therefore, the sword of Brutus is holy. Therefore, the waghnakh of Shivaji is sacred. 
Therefore, the bloodshed in the Revolutions in Italy is of fair fame. Therefore, the beheading 
209 
of Charles I is a just deed. Therefore, the arrow of William Tell is divine. And the sin of 
brutality falls heavily on the heads of those who committed the provoking injustice. 
Moreover, had the world no fear of revolt, bloodshed, and revenge, the earth would have bent 
under the devil-dance of unchecked robbery and oppression! If Oppression were to be secure 
from the fear that Nature would, sooner or later, create the Avenger of Temporary Injustice, 
the whole world would have swarmed to-day with Tsars and robbers! But because very 
Hiranya-Kashipu has his Narasimha; because every Dushshasana has his Bheema; because 
every evil-doer has his avenger, there is still some hope in the heart of the world that Injustice 
cannot last. Such a revenge, therefore, is nature’s own reaction against Injustice. And, 
therefore, the sin of the cruelty of that revenge rebounds on the origional evil-doers. 
And it was the fire of such a divine vengeance that was burning in the heart of the sons of 
Hindusthan in 1857. Their thrones were broke, their crowns smashed, their country taken 
away, their religions trodden under foot, their lands confiscated, their properties robbed, and 
laws despised; they had been cheated with promises made only to be broken; insults and 
outrages had reached a climax. Life itself had lost all its charms for them on account of the 
dire dishonour in which they had sunk. Requests were in vain; so, also, were petitions, 
complaints, wailings, and cries; all in vain. Then the natural reaction began and everywhere 
could be heard the whispers of “Revenge!” India had been subjected to innumerable,. Cruel 
oppressions each of which, individually, would have justified the revenge. If there had been 
no revolution even after all this we would have had to say “India is dead!” That revenge, 
therefore, was only the inevitable reaction against the English injustice and oppression. And 
when once the whole nation rose up in a rage, we should wonder not that there were 
indiscriminate massacres in one or two places, but that there were not such massacres in 
every place! For, the excited logic of those who committed the massacres naturally began to 
say, "O“pose illegal force by righteous force!” Before the Sepoys who were caught in the 
battle of the river Kali were mounted on the scaffold, the English asked them why they had 
massacred their women and children. They at once retorted, “Sahib, does anyone kill a snake 
and let its offspring alone?” The Sepoys at Cawnpore used to say: “To extinguish the fire and 
leave the spark, to kill a snake and preserve its young is not the wisdom of the wise.” 
210 “Sahib, does anyone kill a snake and leave its offspring alive?” How are the Sahibs going to 
answer this blunt question asked by the Sepoys at Kali-nadi? And this blunt question has not 
been asked by the excited masses of India alone, or the masses of Asia alone, as some 
English writers have been charitable enough to suggest. Wherever national wars are 
proclaimed, national wrongs are avenged by national killing alone. When the Spaniards won 
back their independence from the Moors, to what state did they reduce them? The Spanish are 
neither Indians nor Asiatics. Then, why did they fall on the Moors who had stayed in Spain 
for nearly five centuries, and why did they massacre indiscriminately whole helpless 
familities – men, women, and children – simply for the fault of belonging to another race? 
Why did Greece, in 1821, massacre twenty-one thousand Turkish peasants – men, women, 
and children? The secret society, Hetairia, which is looked upon as patriotic and heroic in 
Europe – what explanation does it give of the massacre? It is only this, that the Turkish 
population in Greece was too small to be kept in the country and too big to be removed 
outside and that, therefore, to kill them all was “a necessary measure of wise policy.” Was 
this not their answer? The idea that no one kills a snake and leaves his offspring alive, also, 
came into the mings of the Greeks and burnt away the natural feelings of mercy in their heart! 
And the whole of the responsibility rests on the black poison of the snake. 
Indeed, if there was no propensity in human nature towards a terrible revenge for an horrible 
injustice suffered, the brute in man would have been still the dominating factor in human dealings. Is not one of the most important functions of law – the punishment of crime? 8 
History bears testimony to the fact that whenever, in the human mind, the passion of 
vengeance – as a consequence of injustice, carried to a climax – rages with uncontrollable 
strength, wholesale massacres and other inhuman atrocities take place in the life-evolution of 
every nation. Instead, therefore, of being surprised at the cruelties and massacres in four or 
five places during the Indian Revolution, our wonder should be that such cruel massacres 
took place on such a modest scale and that this terrible vengeance did not run riot more 
extensively and in all places. All Hindusthan had been scoarched to the bone by the terrible 
oppression of the English, and a most grim reprisal did Indian humanity take when the 
oppression became unbearable – so unbearable that the massacres became not more but rather 
much less than the necessities of national punishment would have required in any other 
211 
8. Sir W. Russell, the famous correspondent of the London Times, remarks: “We who 
suffered from it think that there never was such wickedness in the world; and the incessant 
efforts of a gang of forgers and utterly base scoundrels have surrounded it with horrors that 
have been vainly invented in the hope of adding to the indignation and burning desire for 
vengeance which hatred failed to arouse. Helpless garrisons surrendering without condition 
have been massacred ere now. Risings, such as that of Pontus under Mithridates, of the Irish 
Roman Catholics under Protestant settlers in 1641, of the actors in the Sicilian Vespers, of the 
assassins who smote and spared none on the eve of St. Bartholomew, have been over and 
over again attended by inhuman cruelties, violations, and tortures. The history of Mediaeval 
Europe affords many instances of crimes as great as those of Cawnpore. The history of more 
civilised periods could afford some parallel to them in more modern times and amidst most 
civilised nations. In fact, the peculiar aggravation of the Cawnpore massacres was this – that 
the deed was done by a subject race, by black men who dared to shed the blood of their 
masters and that of poor helpless ladies and children. Here we had not only a Servile War and 
a sort of Jacquerie combined, but we had a war of religion, a war of race, and a war of 
revenge, of hope, of national determination to shake off the yoke of a stranger and to re- 
establish the full power of native chiefs and the full sway of native religions.” – Russell’s 
Diary, page 164. 
country. But Hindusthan did not, in 1857, - for the just removal of its wrongs – give that 
punishment, take that vengeance, cause that bloodshed of which the English nation, led by 
Cromwell, was guilty in the massacres in Ireland. Does not history record how he was veru 
much enraged at the sturdy patriotism of the Irish, how his sword cut to pieces not only those 
who fought but also the helpless, impoverished masses, how rivers of blood flowed in that 
unfortunate country, how helpless women were butchered along with the infants in their arms 
and were weltering in pools of blood, and how, in this manner, Cromwell, for the guilty 
objecdt of conquering and subduing Ireland, committed cruel oppression, took more cruel 
vengeance, and, cruellest of all, caused terrible bloodshed? But, in 1857, in Hindusthan, Nana 
Sahib and the Begum of Oudh, Bahadur Shah and Lakshmi Bai, tried to the last to save 
women and children, though the fierce Sepoys were wild with fury. But how did the English 
women reward Nana for saving their lives at Cawnpore? Why – by playing the spy on him! 
And – how did the European officers return the kindness of the Indians who spared their 
lives? History has to record with shame that they returned it by poisoning the minds of the 
ignorant English soldiery with lying stories of vengeance, by marching at their head against 
212 
the Revolutionaries, by betraying the strategic weakness of the Revolutionaries, and by 
butchering those very Sepoys and villagers who spared their lives. Strange indeed – 
immensely strange it is – that the Hindu people allowed not their constitutional magnanimity 
to be disturbed even by such gross ingratitude! What a number of roofs of the poor 
agriculturists have been instrumental in saving the lives of the hunted English ! Many and 
many a woman and child amongst the English fugitives has been tenderly protected by 
village women, painting them black with their own hands and giving them Indian clothes. 
Raw English officers – insignificant English youths – have again and again been brought 
back to life by Brahmins giving them a sip of milk in time, while they lay by the roadside 
exhausted by running day and night! Read Forrest, and he acknowledges that Oudh – Oudh 
into whose body the knife of oppression had been driven most ruthlessly – treated with 
incomparable generosity the English while they were flying everywhere unprotected. Did not 
the leaders of the Revolution warn their followers bent on vengeance, again and again, by 
issuing proclamations in various places that their sacred cause would become unsuccessful 
through child-murder and woman-murder? The “mutineers” of Neemuch and Nasirabad 
spared the lives of the whites. While some white people were running for very life 
everywhere, even the villagers on the way shouted, “Feringhis, Feringhis, kill the Feringhis!” 
Then, one family came forward and said that they had just dined with Rajputs, and to kill them, therefore, - heartless enemies though they were – was out of the question.9 If the 
Hindusthanee who is by nature kind and magnanimous, whose villages, up to this very day, 
are full of humanity, respect, and regard for life – human and animal, sanctioned and took 
part in the massacres of 1857, then the cruelty of these massacres, instead of reflecting 
discredit on the morals of the nation, proves only the immense hideousness of the Alien 
oppression to which it was now intended to put an end. The famous truth enunciated by 
Macaulay is here well exemplified : “The more violent the outrage, the more assured we feel 
that a Revolution is necessary.” 
And who have the right of sitting in judgment on the people of Hindusthan for the offences 
they are alleged to have committed? The English? If there is anyone in this wide world who 
have the least right to condemn the conduct of the Revolutionaries, it is these English! Is it 
England that is to declare to the world that Hindusthan was guilty of one or two massacres? – 
the England which produced Neill? Or the England which devastated by the sword and 
destroyed by fire villages after villages with the women and children in them? Or the England 
which bound to the stakes and burnt, actually burnt, those brave fellows with the spirit of 
Panday in them, fighting or their country – deeming handing not a sufficient punishment? Or 
213 
the England which seized the innocent Hindu villagers, sentenced them to be hanged, and 
then pierced them with bayonets, and then, Heavens! thrust beef dripping with blood – the 
blood of the cow – down their throats, at the point of the bayonet – a desecration to which 
they would have preferred being hanged and, even, being burnt alive? Or the England which 
ordered, under the very nost of the commander-in-chief, that the body of the Nabob of Farrukabad should be smeared all over with the fat of the pig, before he was hanged?10 Or 
that England which sewed the followed of Islam in the skin of a pig before killing him?11 Or 
the England which advocated these and hundreds of other similar crimes as justifiable 
revenge on the “mutineers” ? Justifiable vengeance! Whose was the justifiable vengeance – 
that of the Panday party enraged and vowing vengeance because their mother – trhe Country 
– was being ground down under oppression for a hundred years, or that of the Feringhi party 
which was guilty of that National oppression? 
Not one individual, not one class, alone had been moved deeply by seeing the sufferings of 
their country. Hindu and Mahomedan, Brahmin and Sudra, Kshatriya and Vaisya, prince and 
9. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I. 
10. Forbes-Mitchell’s Reminiscences. 
11. Russell’s Diary. 
pauper, men and women, Pundits and Moulvies, Sepoys and the police, townsmen and 
villagers,, merchants and farmers – men of different religions, men of different castes, people, 
following widely different professions – not able any longer to bear the sight of the 
persecution of the Mother, brother about the avenging Revolution in an incredibly short time. 
So universal was the agitation! This fact alone shows that, at this time, the utmost had been 
done as far as oppression went. Not even the class of Government officers – the class that 
were individually benefited by the foreign domination – were on the side of the Government. 
An English writer says that to give the list of Government officers who were seduced would 
mean the drawing up a list of all the Government officers in the disaffected provinces. 
Exceptions were rare. He gives the following names as instances :- Kazi Abul Fazul, Chief 
Judge of the N.W.P., the Principal Sudder Amin of Agra, the Munsiff of Agra, the Principal 
Sudder Amin of Delhi, the then Government Pleaders in the Sudder Diwani, the Chief 
Kotwal of Agra, two of the Munsiffs of Delhi, the Principal Sudder Amin of Calcutta, the 
Deputy Collector of Cawnpore, the Deputy Collector of Fatehpur – the man who killed 
Robert Tucker – the rest of the native officers of Fatehpur, the Munsiff of Allahabad, another 
Munsiff of the same province, the Principal Sudder Amin of Bareilly, the Deputy Collector of 
214 
Azimgarh, the Principal Sudder Amin of J - , the Principal Sudder Amin of G - . This is only a select list!12 So all-embracing was the Revolutionary fire. The worst abuse that one could 
use towards another, in those days, was to call him “loyal”! Anyone who showed such 
“loyalty” and any who obtained service under Government were classed as traitors to their 
country and their religion! Those who persisted in Government service were 
excommunicated by their caste; no one would eat with them; no one would marry among 
them; the Brahmin refused to do Puja for him; none would set fire to his funeral pyre. The 
service of the foreigner, of the Feringhi, was considered as sinful as matricide! Are not these indications that the climax of oppression has been reached?13 
12. Rev.Kennedy, M.A., page 43. 
13. “Revolt had, in consequence, swept before it, in many cases, all regard to personal 
interest and all attachment to the former master. The imputations of remaining faithful to the 
Government, in such circumstances has been intolerable. It is well known that the few Sepoys 
who have remained in our services are deemed outcastes, not only by their caste people in 
general. These even say they cannot venture to go to their homes; for, not only would they be 
reproached and denied brotherly offices, but their very lives would be in danger.” – Rev. 
Kennedy. 
And hence this volcano – supremely quiet externally – was boiling inside and had reached the 
bursting point. On the back of this volcano, Oppression was stalking about reckless and 
without fear. But as soon as the psychological moment came and Tyranny stamped on the 
green surface with all the more reckless vehemence the Volcano burst! Behold, the 
Revolution in Eruption! Fountains of fire are surging up – blood is raining upon her – 
piercing shrieks are mingled with the clashing of swords – ghosts are dancing – heroes are 
shouting! The cool green tract of the volcano has split in twain – now it bursts into a hundred 
parts – aye, it has burst in a thousand placed – it has deluged the earth with fire and sword! 
In Kathiawar, there is a curious kind of stream, known as the Vitharoo, in some places. The 
surface of the stream has the appearance of hard ground. Strangers, ignorant of this, step on 
to it confidently. When the hard layer moves a little, they try to steady themselves by firmly 
pressing on the surface. No sooner is this done than the surface yields and the poor wayfarer 
is drowned in the deep waters. The Revolutionary stream had spread over India like the 
Vitharoo. Oppression believed, deceived by the dark colour on the face, that it was only earth 
that suffers without complaint every wrong (as the Sanskrit name for it signifies). 
215 
Oppression stepped on it. The black surface showed agitation. Then Oppression, in the pride 
of its power, pressed harder on this deceptive earth. But, behold! the ground has yielded and 
up surges the bottomless pit of blood, foaming and raging, waves on waves! Doomed 
Oppression! step where you will, no solid ground meets your feet! Know, now at least, and 
know well that below the dark face flow streams of blood, red blood. And hear, even yet, the 
deafening roar of the Volcano’s Eruption! 
THE END OF THE SECOND PART. 
PART-II The Conflagration 
CHAPTER-I THE FIGHT IN DELHI 
AFTER declaring her Independence on the 11th of May, the city of Delhi had been busy in 
organising the wild storm, that such a bold step has raised into a systematised revolution. By 
restoring the Emperor of Delhi to the ancient throne of the Moguls, the citizens of Delhi had 
already created a nucleus mighty enough, by the very prestige of its name, to sustain the 
struggle of a people’s liberation. But this restoration of the old Mogul was a restoration, 
neither to the old power nor to the old prestige, nor to the old traditions. Though the raising of 
the old Bahadur Shah to the Emperirship of Hindusthan was, in a narrower sense, a 
restoration to him of his ancient throne, still in a wider and truer sense, it was no restoration 
at all. For, the Mogul dynasty of old was not chosen by the people of the land. It was thrust 
216 
upon India by sheer force, difnified by the name of conquest, and upheld by a powerful pack 
of alien adventures and native selfseekers. It was not this throne that was restored to Bahadur 
Shah today. No, that would have been impossible; for, such thrones are conquered and not 
received. That would have been suicidal; for, then, it would have been in vain that the blood 
of hundreds of Hindu martyrs had been shed in the three or four centuries preceding. Ever 
since the rising power of Islam left its native wilds of Arabisthan and went conquering East 
and West, irresistible and unchallenged, country after country and people after people had 
been made to prostrate in submission of Islam. But the unopposed wave was opposed, for the 
first time in the land of Bharat, with such strenuous, uncompromising, and undaunted tenacity 
as could be found only very rarely in other histories. For more than five centuries the struggle 
continued; for more than five centuries the Hindu civilisation had been fighting a defensive 
war against the foreign encroachment on its birth-rights. From the death of Prithvi Raj right 
up to the death of Aurangzeb, the war was without a truce. And in the midst of this gory 
struggle of countless years, a Hindu power arose in the western mountains of Bharat Varsha 
which was destined to fulfil the mission of the innumerable dead, who fell fighting in 
protecting the honour of the race. From out of Poona, a Hindu prince Bhausahib – advanced 
with a mighty host, captured the throne of Delhi, and vindicated the honour of the Hindu 
civilisation; the conqueror was conquered and India was again free, the blot of slavery and 
defeat being wiped off. Hindus again were masters of the land of trhe Hindus. 
So, in the truer sense, we said that the raising of Bahadur Shah to the throne of India was no 
restoration at all. But rather it was the declaration that the longstanding was between the 
Hindu and the Mahomedan had endedd, that tyranny had ceased, and that the people of the 
soil were once more free to choose their own monarch. For, Bahadur Shah was raised by the 
free voice of the people, both Hindus and Mahomedans, civil and military, to be their Emperor and the head of the War of Independence. Therefore, on the 11th of May, this old 
venerable Bahadur Shah was not the old Mogul succeeding to the throne of Akbar or 
Aurangzeb – for that throne had already been smashed to pieces by the hammer of the 
Mahrattas – but he was freely chosen monarch of a people battling for freedom against a 
foreign intruder. Let, then, Hindus and Mahomedans send forth their hearty, conscientious, 
and most loyal homage to this elected or freely accepted Emperor of their native soil on the 11th of May, 1857! 
And from far and near, the loyal homage did come to the Delhi monarch, from many Rajas, 
many regiments, and many of the chief cities of Hindusthan. The different regiments that had 
217 
risen at different placed in the Panjab, Ayodhya, Neemuch, Rohilkhand, and many other 
places, marched on to Delhi with their flags and banners, and tendered their services to the 
venerable Bahadur Shah as the accepted head of the Revolution. Many regiments again 
brought whatever treasuries they had looted from the possession of the English Government 
on their way to Delhi and faithfully handed them over to the treasury of the Emperor. A 
proclamation was at once issued, addressed to the whole of Hindusthan, declaring that the 
foreign domination and the rule of the Feringhis had come to and end and that the whole 
nation was free and liberated. It exhorted the people to rise to a man to complete this 
Revolution so promising in its beginning, and warned them that the sole motive that should 
dominate them in this fight should be a self-denying, spiritual fervour and a consciousness of 
a divine duty. “Let it be known that the only inducement we can hold forth is that of Dharma 
alone. Let all those to whom god has granted determination and will, renounce the hope of 
property and of life and join us in this cause of our ancient faith. If the people sacrifice their 
private interest for the public good, the Englishmen will be exterminated from our land. It 
should be known that no one dies before his time and, when his time comes, nothing can save 
him. Thousands of men are carried off by cholera and other diseases; while, to be killed in a 
war of Dharma is martyrdom. And it is the duty of every man and woman to kill or expel 
every Feringhi from the land of Hindusthan. Let zeal for religious duty alone be the motive of 
those who join me, and not any worldly aspiration, though they who rise for the faith get 
happiness in this world too!” 
These extracts are from the different, and sometimes similar, Proclamations published in 
Oudh and Delhi. Another Proclamation was issued from the throne itself and was most 
widely published all over India. Even in the farthest south were found copies passing from 
hand to hand, in the bazaars and in the army. It insisted : “To all Hindus and Mahomedans! 
We, solely on account of religious duty, have joined with the people. Whoever shall, in these 
times, exhibit cowardice or credulously believe the promiseds of the English impostors, will 
be very shortly put to shame and receive the reward for their fidelity to England which the 
rulers of Lucknow got. It is further necessary that all, Hindus and Mahomedans, unite in this 
struggle and, following the instructions of some respectable leaders, conduct themselves in 
such a way that good order may be maintained, the poorer classes kept contented, and they 
themselves be exalted to rank and dignity. Let all, as far as it is possible, copy this 
Proclamation and fix it in some prominent place, escaping detection if prudence requires it, 
and strike a blow with the sword before giving circulation to it!” 
218 
Soon after the general declaration of war against the English power, the Revolutionaries at 
Delhi began to manufacture the arms and ammunition necessary for its continuation. A big 
factory of cannon, guns, and small arms was started, and some Frenchmen were employed to 
supervise the manufacture. Two or threebig ammunition depots were also opened and many 
maunds of gun-powder begs to be prepared by people working day and night. A general order 
was issued prohibiting the slaughter of kine throughout the country and, when once some 
fanatic Mahomedans wanted to insult the Hindus by declaring Jehad against them, the old 
Emperor, seated on an elephant and with all his Imperial officers, went in a procession 
through all the city declaring that the Jehad was against the Feringhis alone! Anyone found 
killing a cow was to be blown up or his hand cut off. Different regiments were named after 
the different princes of the palace. Some Europeans, too, were to be seen fighting on the side 
of the Revolutionaries against the English power. 
The position which the English had occupied after the battle of Bundel-ki-Serai was very 
nicely suited to their military operations. The long range of hills, styles by the English as the 
Ridge, which almost touched the fortifications of Delhi at one of its extremeties and extended 
to the river Jumna four miles ahead, had, owing to its height, a special advantage from the 
military point of view. For the Ridge, being higher than the surrounding level by fifty or sixty 
feet, offered a fine position for the guns so as to keep up a continuous and effective 
cannonade. Again, this Ridge had at its back the wide canal of the Jumna which, owing to the 
heavy rains of the year, was copiously supplied with water even in this month of June. Being 
at their back, this canal was free from attacks of the enemies of the English power, and now 
especially so; for, the Panjab, which would have been the greatest terror to the English had it 
attacked them from their rear as Delhi had been doing from their front, had now declared in 
favour of the British. The Rajas of Nabha, Jhind, and Patiala rendered an immense service to 
the English people by guarding all the highways to the Panjab and, thus, facilitating the 
transport of corn, men, and ammunition from the Panjab into the English camp. This 
combination of circumstances, unfortunate for India, rendered the situation extremely 
favourable to the English. High and lowering hills, behind them a plain for the whole army to 
encamp beyond the range of the enemy’s fire and, at the same time, escape the detection of 
the enemy’s scouts, water living and inexhaustible so closely running, the great highways to 
the Panjab all open, at hand, and protected, and the back guarded by the constant watch of the 
loyal Panjab states at their own cost – all these circumstances heightened the confidence of 
the British commander, Barnard, who along with his officers was of the opinion “Now, to 
take Delhi is not the work of even a day!” 
219 
And if it is not even one day’s work to take Delhi, then, why spend two for it? Why should 
we not reduce this sinful, treason-loving city to dust by ordering these English soldiers to 
pounce upon it just this very minute? The Panjab is the backbone of our army and when that 
is so strong in loyalty, why should we try to take Delhi by these weak tactics of prolonged 
siege? Would it not be better and nobler to rush straightway against that wretched city and 
crush it at the very first onslaught? Let our army be divided; let one of these divisions blow 
up this Lahore gate, let another pull down that Kabul gate, let many others rush 
simultaneously into streets of the city with a torrent-like rush and, taking post by post, let us 
all march on straight against the palace without the loss of a moment! Wilberforce Greathed 
and Hodson – warriors like these are longing for this bold and straight onrush, and have taken 
upon themselves even the entire responsibility of carrying it out to a successful termination. Then, there need be no hesitation at all. So on the 12th of June, General Barnard issued secret 
orders for the assault. It was all settled who should gather, where the gathering should take 
place, and when and how the different divisions should start under the cover of night, who 
should command the right and who the left. All these and many other details of the attack 
were settled and fixed and, now at two o’clock in the morning, the English army began to 
debouch itself on the parade ground which was fixed as the secret rendezvous. When it is 
certain that to-morrow’s night will give us the chance of sleeping in the royal palace itself, 
who is so foolish as to grudge, to-night, a few hours’ loss of sleep? Unlikely, indeed, but 
unfortunately true! For it happened that, at the proper hour, some parts of the army were 
found missing. Brigadier Graves thinks it rashness to begin the assault on Delhi in this 
fashion and it is even suggested by many others that such a scheme would be fatal to the 
British power itself all over India. Therefore, the dreams of the quick success and straight 
attacks, indulged in by the British army, had to be realised that night not in the palace of 
Delhi but on the camp-beds alone. 
The next morning, Willberforce Greathead again drew up a scheme for the future attack and 
sent it to the commander, Barnard, for reconsideration of the same. General Barnard, though 
a famous warrior known much in the Crimean campaigns, yet had been suspected of a very halting and hesitating mind. He called a council of war, on the 14th of June, to consult his 
chief officers on the subject of the assault. Even after the bold and eloquent advocacy by 
Greathead of a straight assault, the other officers could not feel confident of its success, and 
they urged further that even assuming that the assault would result in success, still, it would 
be much waste of energy and prestige as an actual defeat. The straight assault might carry 
220 Delhi – yet, how to hold it? How many English soldiers were likely to survive the constant 
cannonade of the Revolutionaries from street to street and from house to house? Barnard 
himself was most diffident of the issues. After all this discussion, the war council agreed – simply to disagree! And thus, even like the night-dream of the 12th of June, passed away this day-dream of the 15th of June, leaving “the straight assault” and “the bold rush” still in their theoretical existence and excellence. This council of war again sat, on the 16th of June; but 
that ended in a worse division of opinion and diffidence of mind. For, as the English 
commander was planning thebold and straight assault on the city of Delhi, there, on the other 
side, into the city of Delhi were pouring fast new hearts, new treasuries, and new energy. And 
the Revolutionaries, leaving the defensive policy which they had up to this time observed, 
began to assume the offensive as well, made frequent sorties, and attacked the British army 
from different sides and with varying success. 
The regiments that had risen all over India had been, all the while, pouring into Delhi with 
their treasuries, arms, and ammunition and left no anxiety in the Revolutionary camp as to the 
provisions of war or to the number of Sepoys. And so, it was quite natural that the 
Revolutionary army should assume the aggressive and pin the English army to its place by 
not allowing it to move onwards even by a single step. After making a bold attack, after a 
slight or even a bloody skirmish or encounter , without themseves suffering any heavy losses, 
the Indian army would retire into the city. By this harassing policy, the Revolutionary army 
kept the English in constant check and prevented them from assuming the offensive. On the 12th of June, they issued out of the city and, concealing themselves in threes and low grounds, 
advanced as far as within fifty yards of the English front and attacked them before they were 
aware of their presence. The English lost many artillerymen and Knox himself was killed by 
a Sepoy who deliberately aimed at and shot him. Simultaneously with this, another division 
of the Sepoys attacked the English rear, and there a hot encounter took place. Even on the 
right of the English army, the post called “Hindu Rao’s house” was most vigorously attacked 
by the Sepoys. “A detachment of native irregular cavalry, on whose loyalty the English had 
relied, went over to the enemy. And so sudden was the retrograde movement that the greater 
number of them escaped from the first of our guns which were turned upon them as soon as their treachery was disclosed.”1 Major Reid who was in charge of this place says: “They went 
to the front just as if they were going to charge; but no sooner had they closed than, to my 
horror, I saw them mix up with the enemy and walk off with them. Immeidately I saw this, I 
ordered the guns to open upon them but the wretches were too far off and I don’s think that 
more than half-a-dozen were killed.” 
221 
After this assault, every day saw the Revolutionaries issuing from out the city and every 
evening saw them retiring back into the city. Any regiment that newly came into the city had to go out and attack the enemy the very next day. On the 13th of June, Hindu Rao’s house was again attacked; the 60th regiment (the same that joined the Revolutionaries on the 12th) was 
conspicuous in the day’s action. Major Reid writes that they “marched up the Grand Trunk 
Road in columns of sections right in front and led the attack headed by the Sirdar Bahadur of 
the regiment, who made himself very conspicuous, calling out to the men to keep their 
distance as he intended to wheel to his left. They fought most desperately. The Sirdar 
Bahadur was killed by his orderly, Lall Singh. I took the riband of India from his breast and sent it to my wife.” On the 17th of June, the Indian army tried to erect a battery on the Idga 
building, which would have completely enfiladed the Ridge. Seeing this, Major Reid and 
Henry Tombs attacked the Revolutionaries from both sides and pressed upon them with 
irresistible force. But the handful of brave Revolutionaries who had been entrapped in this 
1. Kaye’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 411. 
building did not surrender at all. When they could no longer discharge volleys of shots, they 
threw away their guns, drew out their swords, and fell fiercely on the British foe. They did 
not allow the enemy to occupy the Idga building, until every one of them was killed and fell 
fighting at his post! 
On the 18th of June, the Sepoys who had rebelled at Nasirabad came to Delhi, and delivered 
over the treasure that they had brought with them to the royal authorites; and their 
representatives were redeived by the Emperor himself in the palace; and they were treated 
with due honour and respect. At the Durbar, the representatives of the Sepoys of this regiment took oath to attack the English army on the 20th of June. Accordingly, the morning of the 20th of June saw the hosts of Revolutionaries leaving the gates of the city and marching 
towards the foreign foe. In order to attack the English forces on their rear, the Sepoys stole 
forth through Sabzi Mundi and, taking the English by surprise, they opened fire with terrible 
effect and advanced against the English. Scott, Money, Tombs, and other English officers 
tried their utmost by heavy cannonading to stop the onslaught, but the tenacity with which the 
Indian army pushed on was irresistible. The brigade from Nasirabad pushed on with such 
destructive force that the brave Tombs cried out, through supreme despondency, “Run on, 
222 
Daly, run on! Or my cannon are lost to the enemies!” Daly did come on with the Indians of 
the Panjab but, in a short time, was sent back by the Revolutionaries with a bullet lodged in 
his shoulder. As the evening approached, the Revolutionaries decidedly got the upper hand. Again, they pressed on, nay, almost captured the British guns. The 9th lancers and the loyal 
Panjabees, though they more than once came rushing against them, had to retire precipitately. 
The night set in, but the field was still hotly contested. The English did their best but could do 
nothing further than to save their cannon. Lord Roberts writes : “The mutineers routed us.” 
Hope Grant had a horse killed under him, himself was terribly wounded, and, but for the 
loyaltyof a Mahomedan horseman standing near by, would have been killed in a minute. Such 
fighting continued till the middle of the night, but still the advance of the Sepoys could not be 
checked, and so, at last, the English retired from the battlefield and left the Revolutionaries in 
complete and victorious possession of an important position at the rear of the British camp! 
That night the British commander could not sleep for anxiety. For, had the Revolutionaries 
retained the possession they had so bravely won, they would have completely cut off the 
British communications with the Panjab. To avoid this evil, the British, early in the morning, 
were preparing to offer a further resistance to the victorious Swadeshi army. But owing to the 
want of ammunition and further additions to their numbers, the Sepoys retired into the city, 
leaving the English to take possession of the ground they had vacated. The news of this battle 
and the dogged march of the Sepoys had encouraged the Delhi people and, the canon on the 
wall being of long range, they kept up a constant and unceasing fire on the British army. 
These onslaughts of the Delhi army effectively prevented the British army from assuming the 
offensive, by constantly compelling them to be themselves on the defensive. And the 
difficulty which the English found even in maintaining the ground they had occupied made it 
impossible for them to advance even a step further without receiving new succour from the Panjab. And, to add to all these difficulties rose to-day – the 23rd of June, 1857! 
This 23rd of June of 1857 is the centenary of the battle of Plassey! It was on this day that, a 
hundred years ago, in the gamble for empires the Indian dice proved unlucky on the 
battlefield of Plassey. One hundred years have passed, each adding new insults and new 
shame to those previously inflicted! To settle this standing account of a century of 
degradation, to wash off these national insults and this national shame by torrents of blood – 
this is the fierce desire that gleams in the eyes of all the Sepoys in the city of Delhi. Through 
every breeze of the wind and through every ray of the sun, through every thundering roar of 
the cannon and through every clashing of the sword, comes forth a deep rumbling voice, 
223 
“Plassey! The Vengeance of Plassey!” As soon as the dawn announced the hundredth 
anniversary of the woeful field of Plassey, the Revolutionary forces began to pour out of the 
Lahore gates of the city. The English people, too well aware of the fact that this day would 
tax their energies to the utmost, were quite prepared and had already drawn up their soldiers 
in battle-array even before the day rose. Nay, through this very anxiety, they requested the 
Government of the Panjab to send them help, which fortunately for them, did arrive on the 
eve of this day. This news of the arrival of fresh troops from the Panjab infused the English 
with great confidence. But, neither this news of the reinforcements which the English 
received nor the discovery of the fact that the British had already destroyed the bridges 
leading to their rear would stop the enthusiasm of the Revolutionaries. They rushed on 
through the Sabzi Mundi and began to open fire on the British. The British infantry led 
charge after charge, but the Revolutionists repulsed them as often as they sallied forth. The 
artillery from the walls of the city was doing its work with equal vigour. Hindu Rao’s house, 
too, was receiving its share of attention from the Revolutionaries. At twelve in the noon, the 
battle was raging hottest. The Revolutionaries led attacks after attacks on the Panjabee 
division, the Gurkha battalion, and the white troops of the British. Major Reid says: “The 
mutineers, about twelve o’clock, made a most desperate attack on the whole of my position. 
No man could have fought better. They charged the rifles, the guides, and my own men again and again and, at one time, I thought I must have lost the day.”2 
That one of the bravest English officers, fighting on the very spot, should write these words 
testifies to the fierceness and strength of the attacks of the Revolutionaries. Yet, they had no 
capable leader who could bring into a focus these scattered elements of fire and energy. The 
ardent desire to win back the liberty of the land and the remembrance of the national insult of 
Plassey were the only ties that could keep them coherent. Even the English artillery was in a 
great danger of being captured by the Indian army and, at last, the chief officer, Colonel 
Welshman, himself was shot dead while goading on his men! The whole day, every man in 
the English camp was fighting hard and now it seemed that they could no longer hold on. But 
still the British commander need not lose hope! For the fresh troops of the loyal Panjabees 
that had come this very morning are eager to try their chance! They were ordered to march on 
and, against this fresh attack of fresh soldiers, the Revolutionaries, who had unceasingly been 
fighting the whole day, had to enter into an unequal contest. However, till the night set in, the 
Revolutionaries fought on, greatly handicapped as they were. And then, the armies retired 
from the field, each party claiming the honour of a victory! So ended the centenary of Plassey 
224 
in the defeat of neither, and both the armies entered their respective camps, filled with respect 
for each other’s courage and bravery. 
Day after day, new troops were coming in on both sides. The English forces, after frequent 
reinforcements from the Panjab had by this time, risen to the number of seven thousand. On 
the other side, the regiments of Rohilkhand who had risen in revolt had reached Delhi, with 
Bakht Khan at their head. Lord Robert says : “The Rohilkhand army, having crossed the 
bridge of boats, began to enter the city through the Calcutta gate. We could clearly tee these 
thousands of Sepoys from the Ridge, entering the city with perfect discipline and drill playing 
martial tunes, and waving variegated flags and banners.” The only force that was able to unite 
to some extent these different regiments in Delhi was that of love of the principle alone. For, 
there could grow no organised and compact army from amongst these thousands of Sepoys of 
different castes and creeds who had never seen the faces of each other in their whole life and 
had been drifted together by a chance storm. In spite of the utmost efforts of the Emperor and 
2. Major Reid’s Siege of Delhi. 
his councillors to stop looting and anarchy in the city, no day would pass without some 
complaint or other of the Sepoy lawlessness, or of looting, or of blackmail. In this state, the 
supreme need of the hour was a leader who could unite these innumerable and divergent 
forces into a unifying focus. The city of Delhi, in spite of the growth of the evil tendencies 
and vicious propensities in the men, so natural in an agitated time as this, had led attack after 
attack on the English army and had, at least, held them in fear and check. It was the ardent 
desire amongst the soldiery and the citizens to drive away the foreign foe, that enabled them 
to do this. But to ensure ultimate success, it was imperatively necessary that this love of the 
abstract principle must be united with, and concentrated in, the ability of a great personality. 
It was, therefore, thought to be a Godsent when the brave Bakht Khan of Rohilkhand entered 
Delhi with his troops and treasury. The state of the public mind at Delhi, at the time of the 
arrival of Bakht Khan, is well descrfibed in the diary of one who was then living in Delhi. 
This extract, though meagre and casual, is taken here not only to give some account of this 
particular day but to give a general idea of the stateof Delhi and the course which events were 
taking. “The bridge of the Jumna is repaired; for, the arrival of the Rohilkhand troops is 
expected. The Emperor with a telescope viewed the approaching army of Rohilkhand while it was still far away. On the morning of the 2nd of July, Nabob Ahmad Kuli Khan, with all other 
225 
nobles and citizens, went forth to receive the army of Rohilkhand. Hakeem Ahsanullah Khan, 
General Sanad Khan, Ibrahim Ali Khan, Gulam Kuli Khan, and other leavers, too, were 
present. Mahomed Bakht Khan, the commander of the forces of Rohilkhand, requested the 
Emperor to accept his services. When Bakht Khan pressed his request to know the desire of 
the Emperor, the Emperor said : ‘It is my ardent desire to see that the people are completely 
protected, that the security of life and property is maintained, and that the extermination of 
the British foe is triumphantly carried out.’ The general then said that, if the Emperor wished, 
he was ready to act as the commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary forces. At this, the 
Emperor pressed the hand of the general with affection. Then, the different heads of the 
different regiments were called together and they were asked whether they would elect Bakht 
Khan as commander-in-chief. All of them voted ‘aye’ and took military oaths of obeying the 
general as their commander-in-chief. After the levee was over, the Emperor again granted a 
private interview to the general. All over the city, the order went forth that Bakht Khan would 
act as the commander-in-chief. He was presented with a shield, a sword, and the title of 
General. The Prince Mirza Mogul was appointed adjutant-general. Bakht Khan informed the 
Emperor that, even if any of the princes of royal blood would continue looting in the city, he 
would not hesitate to cut off his ear and nose at once. The Emperor replied, ‘You are invested 
the supreme authority. Do whatever you think best, without the least hesitation’. The Kotwal 
of the city was ordered that if there was any row or looting through his negligence in the city 
he would be hanged. Bakht Khan reported that he had brought with him four infantry 
regiments, seven hundred cavalry, six horse guns, three field-pieces, etc., etc. As this part of 
the army had been given its pay for six months in advance and as the general had with him 
four lakhs of Rupees in cash, the Emperor was assured that he need have no anxiety about 
money or pay. Not only this, the Emperor was informed that further captures of money would 
at once be sent to the Royal Treasury. The emperor distributed sweet-meat worth four 
thousand Rupees amongst the Sepoys. The Sepoys of Agra, the regiments of Nasirabad, of 
Jallundhar, all are under the command of Bakht Khan. The general ordered that every citizen 
in the city should be armed. All householders and shopkeepers should keep arms. And those 
who had none should, at once, ask for them at the Supreme Thana and they would be given 
them free. But none should be found without arms. Any Sepoy who would be found looting 
would be deprived of his hand. Bakht Khan went to the armoury and, after examining it, got 
the arms and powder-magazines properly arranged. At eight in the night, the general went to 
the place. The Emperor, with Begum Zinad Mahal, Hakeem Ahsanullah Khan, and Ahmad 
Kuli Khan, discussed the state affairs. In the general parade on the 3rd of July, nearly twenty thousand Sepoys were present.”3 
226 
While the arrival of Bakh Khan was giving the Revolution in Delhi some sort of organisation, 
in the English camp too, men of energy and initiative were arriving from the Panjab and other 
places. The English government had very few men with them who could surpass, in energy or 
ability; the brave Brigadier-General Chamberlain who had just arrived from the Panjab. The 
famous military engineer, Baird-Smith, too, came there. All the men who distinguished 
themselves in the Sikh War were sent from the Panjab by John Lawrence to help the English 
army at Delhi. Then, General Barnard decided to try once more the “straight and bold” 
assault on Delhi which had been so many times thought of and given up in the last. Even as in the past, this assault too was perfectly planned. And on the 3rd of July, the English army, all 
the while standing ready to march, did begin to move – but, lo! Someone has just brought the 
news that General Bakht Khan was spared them all the trouble of marching on Delhi; for he himself has marched upon them! On the 4th of July, Bakht Khan again came forth and pressed 
on the English rear as far as Alipur itself! 
3. Native Narratives by Metcalfe, page 60. 
That, the city of Delhi, about which the English had been openly boasting before the siege 
began that to see it was to conquer it, should not allow him even to take one step further on in 
spite of new forces pouring from the Panjab to his help, even after the constant struggle of a 
complete month, was too much of an anxiety and shame to the sensitive nature of Barnard. 
The English were so eager to take Delhi and so confident of their ability to do so that long 
before June had ended, the news of the fall of Delhi would reach Bombay, Calcutta, and 
Madras! And, no sooner did this usual news prove as usually groundless than the English 
people all over India would begin to ask each other, “What are the English forces doing at 
Delhi, at all?” This anxiety and shame were working on the mind of Barnard. And to this 
gloomy view of the past there could be seen nothing in the future but a still darker sequel! He 
was not allowed even a moment’s rest by the constant attacks of the Sepoys; nor could he fail 
to see that every day that rose was lessening the hope of carrying any bold or straight assault 
on the city of the Revolutionaries. At last, Barnard, the commander of the British forces, 
emaciated in body and eaten up in mind by this hopelessness and dark despair, fell an eary victim to cholera, on the 5th of July. This came up like a shock over the English forces in the 
camp. This was the second commander of the English forces who tried to enter the city of 
227 
Delhi but succeeded only in entering the grave, instead! General Reed, now, took up the 
charge and became the third commander of the English forces! 
While the British camp was busy in planning assaults, the people of Delhi were busy in 
actually carrying them out. All of them cannot be described here for want of space. Yet, the sortie of the 9th of July and again that of the 14th of July, and the doggedness with which the 
Revolutionaries fought, and the bravery with which the English and revolutionaries fought 
are too important and inspiring to be omitted without any remark. On the first day, the 
English cavalry was actually routed and driven back. The English artillery was silenced. A 
brave Sepoy threw Hill and his horse down on the ground. Hill, recovering himself, drew his 
sword, while three Sepoys jumped upon him. Hill tried to shoot twice and twice he missed, 
while one of the Sepoys succeeded in snatching away his sword. They closed in hand-to-hand 
fight; they struggles; down they came. Hill was lying on the ground and the Sepoy was 
standing with one foot planted on Hill’s breast and with sword drawn in his hand. Major 
Tombs saw this from a distance of nearly thirty feet; he aimed and shot at the Sepoy and 
killed him. Major Tombs raised Hill from the ground and began to move him off, but saw, to 
his utter dismay, that yetanother Sepoy had picked up the pistol of Hill and was coming 
towards him. The Sepoy, single-handed, fought with two or three Englishmen, wounded one 
with the sword, killed the second, and was himself struck down by the sword of a third. 
Tombs and Hill, both of them got the “Victoria Medal” for this brave encounter, and Sir John 
Kaye says that the brove Sepoy, too, ought to have got the “Bahadur Shah Medal”! How 
many must have deserved the Bahadur Shah Medal for their brave martyrdom in that War of 
Independence! But this, too, is equally true, that those that are so brave and so self-sacrificing 
get, if not the Bahadur Shah medal, yet the nobler one, the Duty medal of Martyrdom, even 
from the hands of Death himself! On this day, the English soldiers were disgracefully routed! 
But unable to avenge this on the Revolutionaries, these brave people went back to their camp 
and wreaked their vengeance on the poor innocent bhishtis (water-carriers) and other Indians in their service, by actually cutting them down to death in cold blood!”4 And yet it was these 
bhishtis and others who had kept the English army in fighting condition! But the English were worsted still more terribly in the attack of the 14th of July. For, on this day, the brave 
Chamberlain was shot dead by a Sepoy. “The first warrior in our camp, the first in fame, the 
first in honour! Woeful the day when our Chamberlain was carried back to the camp 
wounded mortally! – ” such is the language with which the English historians express the 
fullness of their grief at this their national loss. 
228 
Thus, the 15th of July passed off and still the proud towers of Delhi were carrying their flags 
and banners, resplendent in the rays of the sun, proclaiming to the world that the city had now 
become the abode of Freedom! At last, Reed himself resigned and retired to the Himalayan 
hills to avoid a sure death! This was the third commander of the English forces. Two were put 
into the grave; the third could survive simply by resigning the charge – still Delhi could not 
be taken! The chiefs of the staff, Quartermaster-General Becher and Adjutant-General 
Chamberlain were laid down in the camp expecting their death every moment – still Delhi 
could not be taken! Nay, even the question of self-defence is getting more and more hopeless 
by the constant and harassing attacks of the Revolutionaries who numbered, by now, more 
4. “It is related that, in the absence of tangible enemies, some of our soldiery, who 
turned out on this occasion, butchered a number of unoffending camp-followers, servants, 
and others who were huddling together, in vague alarm, near the Christian church-yard. No 
loyalty, no fidelity, no patient good service on the part of these good people could extinguish, 
for a moment, the fierce hatred which possessed our white soldiers against all who wore the 
dusky livery of the East.” – Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, p. 438. 
than twenty thousand! Even if the Revolutionaries lost more men in the encounters, yet the 
English could reap absolutely no advantage. But the death of even a handful of their number 
perceptibly weakened their strength. For this reason, the English determined to remain only 
on the defensive. For, defeats in these assaults could neither weaken the Revolutionaries nor 
put a stop to their further assaults. But, on the contrary, they grew more determined and 
fearless and did openly boast, “Even a success is costing the English as much as a defeat!” 
Even the English people themselves all over India began to write and criticise and complain 
that “the besiegers themselves are besieged!” And, when, in such straits, even the third 
commander retired, then, men like Greathead, Chamberlain and Rotton began to give up 
every hope of attacking Delhi and, in the headquarters itself, the question of actually raising 
the siege of Delhi began to be discussed! This was the state of the siege of Delhi when the 
third commander, Reed resigned and the fourth one, Brigadier-General Wilson, succeeded 
him in the command! 
229 
CHAPTER-II HAVELOCK 
WHEN the Sikh Sepoys delivered the Allahabad fort into the hands of the English, instead of 
into the hands of the Revolutionaries, the English made it a base of operations on their side. 
There was now no longer the danger of having to carry on all civil and military operations in 
the North India from a distant centre like Calcutta. Lond Canning decided to shift the capital 
itself to Allahabad until the Revolution was suppressed and, accordingly, he came in a few 
days to reside at Allahabad. But, in the meanwhile, came the news of the miserable plight of 
the English at Cawnpore and their piteous cries for help. General Neill, therefore, kept a 
small army for protection at Allahabad and sent the rest under Major Renaud to raise the 
siege of Cawnpore. This deatchment marched on burning villages indiscriminately, on their 
230 way. Just then, Havelock was appointed to the command of the Cawnpore army in place of 
Neill. He arrived at Allahabad towards the end of June. He was a trained and an experienced 
officer. Fortunately for the English, the war with Persia came to an end about the time when 
the revolution actually broke out, and the whole English army, under good commanders like 
Havelock, arrived in India just at the time when they were very badly wanted. Though Neill 
was extremely chagrined to find that Havelock superseded him as the chief officer at 
Allahabad and that he had to be under him, he did not allow his private feelings to come in 
the way of the welfare of his country’s rule in India. He made vigorous efforts towards the 
equipment of the army. He gave every help to the army which was to be commanded by 
Havelock, made all arrangements as to the commissiariat, and quietly handed over the charge 
of the troops to Havelock when the latter officer arrived. This army was now fully prepared 
to go to the assistance of the English at Cawnpore. Havelock was eager to start, when 
suddenly news came that Sir Hugh Wheeler was defeated and had surrendered and that all the 
Englishmen, including him, had been massacred on the banks of the Ganges! 
Havelock determined to revenge their death and set out in haste from Allahabad towards 
Cawnpore. He had with him one thousand select English infantry, one hundred and fifty 
Sikhs, a picked detachment of English cavalry, and six guns, all desperate with rage. There 
were, also, several civil and military officers going along with them, officers whose life had 
been saved consciously and deliberately by the revolted Sepoys and the people, out of mercy, 
or who had escaped their vigilance, and who now came to give information about the 
geography of the country to the new officers and men, to fight along with them and to wreak 
a terrible vengeance. And these brave Englishmen, whom one word of a Sepoy would have 
despatched from this earth, who would have been dead by now but for their mercy, now came 
together and started the campaign of burning villages wholesale. 
When the news came to Cawnpore that a detachment under Major Renaud was marching 
towards Fattehgurh, Nana Sahib sent some troops in that quarter. Hoping to crush the small 
detachment in a short time, this army under Jwala Prasad and Tikka Singh reached 
Fattehgurh. But, by that time, Havelock’s army had joined Major Renaud and the united 
English army fired their guns as soon as they heard that the Revolutionaries had come. When 
the small Revolutionary force rushed into the field, confident of crushing Major Renaud in no 
time, it found arrayed against it the whole army of Havelock, together with artillery and all necessaries. This was on the 12th of July. They were, thus, completely taken by surprise. The 
231 
fight began and they had to retire from the field leaving their guns behind them. Pursuit was 
impossible and the English army gave up the idea and entered the town of Fattehpur. At the 
time of the rising in Fattehpur, the leadership of the Revolution had been taken up by a 
deputy magistrate in the English employ, a Mahomedan named Hikmat Ullah. English 
officers had also been killed there. The sword of English revenge now fell on that town. The 
former magistrate of the town, Sherer, who had been spared his life by the Revolutionaries 
and let off, now came with the army and was not eager to exercise his power of magistracy, 
so long in abeyance. So, a looting by the military was ordered, first of all. When it was 
certain that nothing more remained in the tow worth looting, the order was given to set fire to 
it; but the honour of this work was left to the Sikhs. So, when the Ednglis troops left, the Sikh 
troops performed their allotted task, set fire to the whole town and followed them. 
When the English army burnt alive the whole town of Fattehpur, the fumes spread along and, 
at last, reached Cawnpore. The news reached Nana Sahib’s camp that the detachment which 
attacked Major Renaud’s force was suddenly set upon by Havelock’s army and that, after 
routing them. The English had entered the town and destroyed the whole city by first looting 
the place and then, burning alive the people in it. The whole of the Cawnpore Durgar was 
excided with rage and fury. Just when it was decided to send another army under Nana Sahib 
himself to obstruct the English march on Cawnpore at the Pandu river, it was announced that some traitors who had deserted to the English had just been arrested.1 At their trial it was 
proved that some of them had carried letters from the women prisoners at Gawnpore to the 
English at Allahabad. When the news spread that those whom Nana had saved from massacre 
as “women” were maintaining secret, treacherous correspondence with the English at 
Allahabad, the important question arose as to what would be done to them. As the English 
burnt Fatehpur, why not avenge it by destroying this “Bibigarh” (Palace of Females) in 
return? 
Though the prison was called Bibigarh, there were, also, some men in it saved by the 
intervention of Nana Sahib. After the unanimous resolution that these prisoners, along with 
the traitors who carried the correspondence, should all be killed, the dreadful meeting of the 
dreadful night adjourned. Next day, the spies and the Englishmen were dragged out of the 
prison and made to stand in a line. At first, the spies were decapitated with swords, in the 
presence of Nana Sahib himself; then, the Englishmen were shot. When Nana Sahib left the 
232 
place, people came up to the corpses and mocked, “This is the Governor of Madsras; this of 
Bombay, and this of Bengal.” 
When this grim mockery was going on here, the order was sent to the Sepoys at Bibigarh to 
kill all the inmates. When the warders would not dare to do it, it was resolved to bring 
someone of greater mettle as regards cruelty. The chief wardress of Bibigarh, Begum Sahib, 
sent a man to the butcher quarter of the Cawnpore city. In the evening, some butchers, 
brandishing naked swords and big knives in their hands, entered the prison gesticulating in 
rage. They entered about evening and came out when it was just beginning to be dark. But, in 
1. “After the defeat of Nana Sahib’s forces at Fattehpur, some reputed spies were 
brought to the Nana Sahib. They were accused of being the bearers of letters supposed to 
have been written to distant stations by the helpless women in prison. In the correspondence, 
some of the Mahajans and Baboos of the city were believed to be complicated. It was, 
therefore, resolved that the said spies together with the women and children, as also the few 
gentlemen whose lives had been spared should all be put to death.” Narrative of the Revolt, 
page 113. One of the Christian prisoners in the prison of Nana Sahib tells the same account 
and one of the Ayahs (nurses) deposes to the same effect. 
that short space of time, there was a regular stream of red blood within the prison! As soon as 
they entered, they stabbed right and left and killed about one hundred and fifty English 
women and children! The room was a lake of blood with pieces of human flesh swimming in 
it. When they went in, the butchers walked on the ground; but when they came out, they had 
to wade through blood. The night was wailing with the screams of the half-dead, the deep 
groans of the dying, and the piteous cries of a few children who escaped on account of their 
size in the general massacre. About dawn, the unfortunate creatures were dragged out of 
Bibigarh prison and pushed into a neighbouring well. A couple of children, so long crushed 
under the weight of the dead bodies, got out near the well and began running away. A blow 
threw them also dead on the heap of the dead. Men drank water so long from the well, but the 
well now drank human blood. As the English had thrown to the skies the screams of brown 
women and children at Fatehpur, so, the Pandays threw the screams and the corpses of white 
women and children into the deep down! The account between the two races, extending over a hundred years, was thus being settled! 2 Even the Bay of Bengal might, in ages, be filled up; 
but the yawning well of Cawnpore – never! 
233 
About the same time, Havelock was pushing forward after defeating the army sent by Nana 
Sahib at Pandu nadi. Commander Bala Sahib Peshwa, brother of Nana Sahib, was hit by a 
bullet in the shoulder, in a skirmish, and returned to Cawnpore. Nana Sahib called together a 
council of war to settle the future plan of campaign. The question was discussed whether 
Cawnpore should be evacuated without fight or a strong resistance should be offered to the 
English advance; and, at last, after a long discussion, the latter alternative was decided upon. On the 10th July, the English army came near Cawnpore. The news of the Cawnpore well had 
not reached them. Though Wheeler’s fort was gone, they had a strong intention of rescuing 
Bibigarh. With this desire, they did not rest a moment in spite of fatigue, sun, and strife. 
When the turrets of Cawnpore came into view, Havelock was inspired all the more by these 
2. “The refinements of cruelty – the unutterable shame – with which, in some 
chronicles of the day, this hideous massacre was attended, were but fictions of an excited 
imagination, too readily believed without inquiry, and circulated without thought. None was 
mutilated, none were dishonoured......... This is stated, in the most unqualified manner, by 
the official functionaries, who made the most diligent enquiries into all the circumstances of 
the massacres in June and in July.” – Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 281. 
hopes. He sent reconnoitring parties to spy the army of the Pandays. That army was so 
splendidly arranged on the field that the English warrior who had spent all his life on the 
battlefield perceived that there were some men, among the Revolutionaries, of extraordinary 
military skill. He called together his officers and drew out for them, with his sword, on the 
ground a map of his plan of attack. While Havelock was explaining to them that, instead of a 
front attack, the Revolutionary left wing should be attacked first, Nana Sahib, mounted on a 
white horse, joined the efficiently arranged troops of the Revolutionaries. From the English 
camp, the figure of Nana Sahib could be seen distinctly galloping into the different ranks and 
encouraging the soldiers. About noon, the English attack on Nana Sahib’s left wing 
commenced. To check this fierce, sudden the unexpected attack on the left, the Revolutionary 
artillery began fire. As the English artillery was a little late in arriving, these guns did very 
effective work. But when Havelock, irritated, by the success of the Revolutionaries, began to 
push forward again in desperate vigour and when the Highlanders, with turned eyes, ran 
straight to the guns and when the English, without going back an inch, rushed forth with the 
234 
cry, “Death or Victory!”, then, the left wing became quite unable to resist the united, sudden 
and orderly attack and retreated, leaving their guns behind. While the left was retreating, the 
English artillery had defeated the right wing. Seeing the English army victorious, the 
Revolutionaries began the retreat along the road to Cawnpore. But, with the courage of 
despair, Nana Sahib rallied them and, with the rest of the guns, renewed the fight. At this 
time, Nana Sahib made marvellous efforts to encourage and lead the Sepoys “Such was the 
battle of Cawnpore. The Revolutionaries fought very well. Some of them did not retire even 
when sword clashed with sword. They saved their guns with determination and the firing was, also, splendidly airmed.”3 One more assault from the English side, and even this 
desperate resistance became in vain and the defeated Revolutionaries retreated towards Brahmavarta. On the 17th of July, Havelock’s victorious army entered the city of Cawnpore. 
Havelock and his army who had brought up to Cawnpore the first wave of victory, to revive 
the lost English prestige were blessed by Englishmen, both in India as well as in England. 
Everywhere in England, in the street-corners, on sign-boards of shops, on the walls of public- 
houses, Havelock’s name was engraved! 
When the permission to loot Cawnpore was given, hundreds of English officers and soldiers, 
along with the Sikhs, fell upon Cawnpore like vultures on a wounded lion. At Bibigarh, the 
3. Red Pamphlet. 
spot was clotted with blood and there was a suspicion that it was English blood that had been 
split there. Therefore, a large number of Brahmins in Cawnpore were caught and those of 
them against whom there was any suspicion of complicity with the Revolution were 
sentenced to death. Not merely that, but, before being hanged, they were made to lick off, 
with their tongue, the blood spots and, then wash away the stains, broom in hand. The reason 
of giving this unheard-of punishment to those about to be hanged is thus given by an English 
officer : “I know that the act of touching Feringhi blood and washing it with a sweeper’s 
broom degrades a high caste Hindu from his religion. Not only this but I make them to do it 
because I know it. We could not wreak a true revenge, unless we trample all their religious 
instincts under foot, before we hang them, so that they may not have the satisfaction of dying 
as Hindus.” In the massacres ordered by the Revolutionaries, not only no religious injuries 
were inflicted on the English, but they were always given time, when they requested so, to 
read the Bible before they were killed. But the English clean took away, so far as they could, 
from the Revolutionaries who were massacred at Cawnpore and Delhi, all consolations of 
religion. But many gallant men, even in this misery, embraced death with a smile for the sake 
235 
of their principle and made sacred the gallows on which they were hanged. Charles Ball says: 
“General Havelock began to wreak the terrible vengeance for the death of Sir Hugh Wheeler. 
Batch of natives mounted the scaffold. The calmness of mind and nobility of demeanour 
which some of the Revolutionaries showed at the time of death was such as would do credit 
to those who martyred themselves for devotion to a principle. One of them, who worked as a 
magistrate at Cawnpore under Nana Sahib, was arrested and put on his trial. But, he seemed 
to indifferent to all the proceedings as if they all referred to someone else and not to him. 
After he was sentenced to death, he rose and turned his back to the judge and walked with a 
firm step to the scaffold erected for him; while the Maungs were making the final 
preparations, he was looking at their movements in an easy and natural manner. And without 
the least agitation, he mounted the scaffold even as a Yopgi enters Samadhi! Fortified by the 
assurances of his creed, death to him was but a transition from the hated association of the infidel Feringhis to the blissful enjoyment of paradise.”4 
While the British army entered Cawnpore and was taking revenge ad libitum, Havelock 
praised the small army consisting of English and Sikhs for having fought bravely in an 
4. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. I, page 388. 
orderly, compact, and determined manner. Soon after this, General Neill also arrived at 
Cawnpore, having left a sufficient English garrison at Allahabad. When these two English 
officers of equal rank came together, each of them would have the desire of having all the 
troops under his control and there was a possibility of more disorder in the already disorderly 
English army. Seeing this, Havelock told Neill plainly on the latter’s arrival. “General Neill, 
it is better that we should understand each other clearly. So long as I am here, the whole 
commandis mine and you should not give any orders.” In order that English interests might 
not suffer through the personal jealolusy of the two officers, Neill remained to guard 
Cawnpore and Havelock marched towards Oudu at the head of the troops going for the relief 
of Lucknow. Neill hit upon a new plan for the defence of Cawnpore. He formed a corps of 
Mahars and gave the town in their charge. The trick of inciting these low class men against 
the higher claseds succeeded wonderfully. When the division among the Hindus and 
Moslems vanished, this caste difference was thus made use of! After the defeat of Cawnpore, 
Nana Sahib Peshwa left Brahmavarta and crossed the Ganges with his treasure and his army. 
His first camp was at Fattehgarh; the English army under Havelock, not being able to 
236 
ascertain Nana’s whereabouts, marched towards Lucknow. By the end of June, the whole 
province of Oudh was a perfect beehive of the Revolutionaries, and it was not easy task to 
march through the province and to relieve Sir Henry Lawrence and raise the siege of 
Lucknow. Still, in the flush of victory, Havelock and his army thought lightly of the work of 
crossing the Ganges and relieving Lucknow. Just as the idea, “to see Delhi was to conquer 
Delhi”, possessed the English army which dedscended from the Panjab, so, the idea that it 
was only necessary to corss the Ganges in order to take Lucknow now haunted Havelock’s 
army going up from Cawnpore. It is true Lucknow is not very far from Cawnpore. It is also 
true that the energy and quickness which was displayed by Havelock on his march from 
Allahabad to Cawnpore inspited him to undertake stupendous tasks with a light heart. But 
now, there was not an inch of space in Oudh that was not involved in the flames of the 
national Revolution. Oudh being the cradle of the Purbhayya Sepoys who began the revolt in 
India, the parents, the children and relatives, and friends of these Sepoys, in every hamlet and 
every cottage, were inevitably burning with Revolutionary spirit. Still, this terriblestate of 
affairs did not daunt the English commander who was full of his victory. He was in such high 
spirits that he hoped to conquer Lucknow at the very sight thereof, then to march to Delhi 
and, after taking it, to go to Agra! With such confidence, Havelock, with two thousand English troops and ten guns, crossed the Ganges on the 25th of July. General Neill stayed at 
Cawnpore and Havelock marked towards Lucknow. Such was the disposition of the English 
troops at the end of July, 1857. 
CHAPTER-III BEHAR 
THE province of Behar and its capital, Patna, did not remain aloof from the wave of 
Revolution which was sweeping over the North-Western Provinces, Allahabad, Agra, and 
Bengal. Of the different districts in the province, the chief towns were Gaya, Arrah, Chapra, 
Motihari, and Muzzafferpore. The army to control the province was stationed near Patna, in the town of Danapur. There was the 7th, 8th, and 40th native infantry and, to keep these in 
check, there were the European artillery and a European regiment, all under the command of Major-General Lloyd; besides, there was the 12th native cavalry regiment under Major 
Holmes stationed near by, at Sigwali. 
237 
The historical town of Patna was the centre of the powerful Wahabi sect of the Moslem 
religion. The English commissioner, Tayler, was certain that Patna would take part in the 
Revolution of 1857, and he therefore kept a close watch on the leaders of that sect. The town 
of Patna which thoroughly hated the English yoke had started a secret society with the object 
of overthrowing the English power as far back as 1852. This secret society had amonst its 
members influential and rich merchants, bankers and Zemindars, a fact which gave the 
society immense funds for its work. As prominent Moulvies accepted leading positions in the 
society, the work soon assumed a grave turn. They had correspondence and communication 
with the secret society at Lucknow as well as with the Sepoys at Danapur. The whole town of 
Patna, from the police officers down to humble booksellers, was anxious and eager for the 
moment when the first blow was to be struck against the English power. 
Patna was the headquarters of the secret society and the organisation counted amongst its 
members representatives of all classes in the vast population of the town. To the mass of the 
people, the word “Feringhi” itself was as gall and wormwood. They had no lack of funds and 
even sent some money to the distant frontier districts in the west to organise a Revolution 
against the English. Since the police had also joined, the nightly secret meetings went on 
without a hitch. The various members of the society employed hundreds of Revolutionaries in 
their service under various pretexts and paid them out of the funds of the society. While Patna 
was, thus, burning with the hatred of Feringhi rule, its flames were spreading in all directions 
in the vast province, giving secret inspiration to the people. Soon, communication was 
established with the Sepoys stationed for the protection of the province, with the Zemindars, 
Rajas, with the chief towns in the various districts, and all were hand and glove with the 
secret society at Patna. The Sepoys in the camp at Danapur began to hold secret meetings and 
form plans at nights, under cover of the trees! And if they saw some Englishman who might 
have discovered them on his patrol, they killed him! When the power of the people was thus 
organised and ready for Revolution, negotiations began with the secret societies at Delhi and 
at Lucknow. 
When the final question was being discussed as to the time when they were to start the 
Revolution, the English commissioner, Mr.Tayler, got the news of Meerut. Following closely 
came the news that there was unrest among the Sepoys at Danapur. The commissioner was a 
clever man and thought the whole of India was rising in Revolution, the Sikhs were yet 
confirmed traitors. Therefore, Tayler immediately sent two hundred Sikhs under Rattray for 
the defence of Patna, and the Sikhs, accordingly left for Patna. But, wherever they passed, all 
238 
the way they were despised and cursed, day and night! They were accused of treachery 
(Nimal-haram) to the nation and, on the way, villagers would ask them sarcastically, “Are 
you true Sikhs or Feringhi converts?” They were advised, secretly and openly, to stand up for 
their country when the crucial moment came. When the Sikhs, with the curses of the whole 
province on their heads, began to enter the town of Patna, the popular fury became intense 
everywhere on seeing them; every citizen of the proud city ostentatiously avoided the touch, 
even of their shadow. What more – the priest of the Sikh temple in that freedom-loving city 
curtly refused entry to these traitors within the temple! The belief that these Sikhs, were not 
real followers of Guru Govind Singh – a belief shared by the Sikh Guru, the Mahomedan 
Moulvie, and the Hindu Prayagwal – is an excellent proof how, in the town of Patna, the ideals of Swadharma and Swaraj were really in unison.1 
When the Sikh army came into Patna, Tayler proceeded to try and nip in the bud the 
Revolutionary activities in the province. The conduct of Waris Ali, the police Jamadar of the 
Tirhut district, apeared suspicious and the authorities suddenly surrounded his house and 
made him prisoner. This Jamadar in the English service was just then writing a letter to a 
1. “As soon as the Sikhs entered the town, a wild Fakir rushed forward into the 
road and, with savage menaces and threatening gestures, reviled them as traitors and 
accursed .....” – Patna Crisis by Tayler. 
Revolutionary leader at Gaya, called Ali Karim! On the evidence of the Revolutionary 
correspondence seized in his house, he was, soon after, sentenced to death. When he was 
brought to the scaffold, he shouted, “If there is any real devotee of Swaraj here, let him 
liberate me!” But, before his request could be heard by the devotees, his lifeless body was 
hanging from the scaffold! 
The Mahomedan leaver, Ali Karim, was also ordered to be arrested and a European 
detachment was sent for the task. When Mr.Lowis, the head of the detachment, came up to 
Ali Karim, the latter mounted his elephant and an exciting race began! But, the spectators 
soon tropped their impartiality and exceeded the bounds of fair play.The neighbouring 
villagers, seeing the Feringhis chasing a countryman, began to harass the former, misdirected 
them on their way, and, at last, even stole one of their ponies! The English officer “irritated 
by fatigue and despair,” left it to his Indian servant to chase the swift Karim and returned the 
next day, not having achieved his task. The servant also, being an English-hater, let Karim 
239 
alone and came back to his master with a sorry face. While these arrests were going on in the 
province, Mr. Tayler came to know the names of several leaders in the city and he resolved to 
surprise them. The Revolutionary secret meetings used to take place in the house of the 
leaders at night and, though Tayler had no definite information about the names of the 
persons who were implicated in, or the general programme formed, still he had no doubt 
about the complicity of three most influential Mullahs of the place. He thought it necessary to 
arrest them at once. However, there was the fear that an attempt to arrest them openly would, 
perhaps, precipitate the revolt he wanted to suppress. So, the honest officer struck upon a new 
plan. One day, select citizens were hospitably invited to Mr. Tayler’s house to confer with 
him on important political matters. When all the guests had arrived, he came up with the 
Sikhs; and when, after some conversation the company were taking leave to depart, Tayler 
stopped the three Moulvies, who were also among the guests, and informed them smilingly 
that, as it was dangerous to leave them at liberty in the then troublous times, they were 
arrested! However, this act was applauded everywhere on the the pretext that it was for the 
good of the English power and all admired Tayler’s energetic action. 
After having thus arrested the prominent Revolutionary leaders without shedding a drop of 
blood, Tayler decided to strike at the town of Patna, while it was still confused at the 
suddenness of the arrests. He therefore issued an order to disarm the town and prohibited the 
people from leaving their houses after 0 P.M. This order rendered the nightly meetings of 
secret societies impossible. The storing of arms, also, became difficult. So long, the 
Revolutionary society at Patna was awaiting the signal to rise from Danapur. But, when this 
life-killing procedure began, they resolved to rise suddenly and boldly rather than be crippled by it. On the 3rd of July, Mussalmans began to crowd towards the house of a leader, Peer Ali 
by name. They entered his house and settled their plans. In a short time, they came out one by 
one, with green flags and shouts of “Din, Bolo! Din!” About two hundred Jehadis came out 
in procession and attacked the church. Just then, a white man, called Lyall, was seen coming 
with sone troops, and Peer Ali shot him dead, and his infuriated followers hacked his body to 
pieces beyond recognition! But, Rattray came with his “loyal” Sikhs and made a desperate 
attack on the Revolutionaries. When the Sikhs thrust their swords in the body of the Mother, 
when their bodies became red with her blood, then, the handful of Revolutionaries were soon 
broken up by the force of superior discipline and arms. The English arrested the 
Revolutionary leaders one after another, among them being Peer Ali who had shot Lyall. 
240 Peer Ali was originally a resident of Lucknow but had lately established himself as a 
bookseller in Patna. He had imbibed the ideas of independence by reading the books which 
he used to sell. The conditions of dependence and slavery became unbearable to him. He 
placed himself in communication with the Revolutionaries at Delhi and Lucknow. He 
imparted to others his passionate patriotism. Though he was only a humble bookseller, he had 
great influence in the Revolutionary councils of Patna. He collected together a large number 
of armed men with the help of the wealthy members of the secret society and they were all 
sworn to rise against the British power at a given signal. When the English officer at Patna, 
Mr. Tayler, began torture and oppression, Peer Ali’s hot nature could not keep quiet. He was 
by nature stern spirited, and brave. He could not bear to see the tortures of his countrymen 
and therefore he, as he confessed later, “rose prematurely.” Next, we see Peer Ali sentenced 
to death, severely handcuffed, his hands bleeding from his founds. He stood before the 
scaffold, with a heroic smile on his face, defying the death that was awaiting him. There was 
only a slight sob when he took the name of his beloved son. Immediately, the English officer, 
to take advantage of his emotion, addressed him these words : “Poor Ali, you might even now 
save your life by disclosing the names of the other leaders.” Turning calmly to the Feringhi 
he replied in bold and noble words, “There are some occasions in life when it is desirable to 
save one’s life – but there are some others when it is more desirable to sacrifice it! This 
moment is one of the latter kind, when to embrace death at once is the means of eternal life!” 
Then, describing in plain language the numerous acts of injustice and oppression committed 
by the English, the martyr dying for his people said, “You might hand me, you might hand 
other men like me; but, you cannot hand our ideal. If I die, thousands of heroes will rise out of my blood and will destroy your kingdom.”2 
With these propetic words, this hero, without casting the shadow of a shame on his country, 
entered by the door of death into the circle of patriots of immportal memory! 
“Out of my blood will rise thousands of heroes!” These last words of the noble martyr could 
not be falsified, were not falsified! At the news of his death, the “most loyal” regiment at Danapur rose in revolt on the 25th of July. In spite of the presence of an English regiment and 
English artillery, the three Indian regiments, with their hands, tore away in disgust the 
Company’s uniforms and marched away to the Shon river. On account of the fear and old age 
of Major-General Lloyd, the chief officer of the place, trhe English armyt did not dare to 
pursue the Sepoys. Though the English major-general was thus handicapped by old age, still, 
in the direction in which the revolted regiments were marching, there is palace of Jagadishpur 
241 
was an old hero who, in spite of age, had the spirit of youth in his arms and his sword, and 
who was proudly twirling his moustache. It is to his banner that the Sepoys were hurriedly 
flocking! 
There was almost always one great defect which often nullified the efforts of the freedom- 
loving Sepoys and people, and that was the want of capable leaders. In the Shahabad district, 
at least, the Jagadishpur palace had removed this want, and therefore the Depoys marched 
thither after crossing the Shon river. For, there the Sepoys could find a leader befitting the 
battle of Swaraj. A man of heroic spirit, of unconquerable valour, and born in a Rajput family 
of ancient fame, this leader of the Swaraj war graced the name of Kumar Singh by wearing it. 
His lordship over the extensive Shahabad lands had been established by the continuity of ages 
and the people there felta natural love towards his ancient family. Storms of great empires 
rose and subsided in the land of Hindusthan from time to time; but, through all those cruel 
vicissitudes, this province was free under its beneficent Rajput princes and continuously 
enjoyed freedom and Swaraj. Through all the most oppressive seasons of a hundred 
Revolutions, the Banyan tree of the dynasty of Kumar Singh had been bearing all the 
inclemencies of heat and cold on its summit, but had never ceased to protect the humble birds 
that nested in its branches. Summer heat might scorch the top; winter frost might bite the 
leaves; but the birds enjoyed the quiet of eternal spring for endless generations. The dynasty 
loved the subjects like its own children; the subjects worshipped the dynasty as the 
representative of God upon earth. But, to the foreign despot, this reciprocal loyalty and 
kindness was a thorn in his side. He therefore determined to ruin this royal family! All of a 
sudden the chattra of Swaraj was broken and the province was laid bare; the tree was struck 
by the cruel lightning and the birds began to flutter about in helpless agony! And it was with 
a determination of avenge the wrongs of his dynasty and his country that the old youth was 
standing on the terrace of Jagdishpur palace, twirling his moustache! 
An old youth! – yes, he was an old youth. For, nearly eighty winters had passed over his head 
and yet the fire in his soul was as fierce as ever and the muscle in his arm was strong. A 
Kumar of eighty years and a Singh! How could he bear the sight of the spoliation of his 
country by the English! After Dalhousie swallowed the kingdom of Oudh, the English went 
about, throughout Hindusthan, digging up and demolishing all raised placed in order to raze 
them all to the ground. It was in that campaign that Kumar Singh’s country also fell a victim. 
Kumar Singh swore that he would shatter to pirces the English rule which had ruined his 
242 
country and Swaraj in this inexcusable, cruel, and unjust manner! And he began at once 
communications with Nana Sahib. 
Commissioner Tayler of Patna had, for long, been receiving information that Kumar Singh 
was planning a Revolution that he had established communications with Revolutionary 
societies throughout India, and that hundreds of Sepoys at Patna were secretly in league with 
him. The very idea, however, that this old man of eighty would run to the battle-field, instead 
of lying down for a peaceful death, appeared to his mind absolutely impossible. Besides, was 
not Kumar Singh always writing letters of loyalty to him? Still, Tayler who was not an 
exception to the usual nobility of heart of Englishmen wrote to Kumar Singh : “You are very 
old and your health is very bad! I feel great anxiety for your company for the rest of your 
days. I will feel very much obliged if you will do me the honour of accepting my hospitality. 
2. The Commissioner Tayler himself says : “Peer Ali himself was a model of a 
desperate and determined fanatic, Repulsive in appearance, with a brutal and sullen 
countenance, he was calm, self-possessed, almost dignified in language and demeanour. He is 
the type of the class of men whose unconquerable fanaticism renders them dangerous 
enemies and whose stern resolution entitled them, in some respects, to admiration and 
respect!” 
With the hope that this invitation will not be rejected, - I am yours etc., Tayler.” In the past 
Afzul Khan had sent a similar invitation to Shivaji! The astute Rajput at once understood that 
the loving invitation of the commissioner meant only the quiet opening of the prison door! 
Therefore, he wrote back: “Thanks awfully! It is true, as you say, that my health is very bad; 
and, therefore, it is that I cannot come to Patna just now. As soon as I feel better, I will start 
immediately”. O Kumar Singh! You are, indeed, uneasy in mind and body! And it is also true 
that, when you feel better after shedding Feringhi blood, you are going to Patna! But, for 
what ? That is a different question. 
Just then came the revolted Danapur Sepoys with the medicine to cure Kumar Singh. “Why 
do you wait now, oh Kumar Singh! We bind you by the oath of the Motherland, by the oath 
of our religion, of your honour! Throw away the sheath and draw your sword for Swaraj! 
You are our king, our leader, our general! You are an ornament to Rajput race; you ought, at 
243 
once, to jump into the battlefield!” Thus cried the Swaraj-loving Sepoys; thus advised the holy Brahmin priests; thus, also, whispered to him his sword, anxious to smite the enemy!3 
Then, the hero of eighty, who was too weak to go on an elephant to Patna, was suddenly 
inspired and, from his sickly bed, he jumped right into the battlefield! 
The Sepoys next hurried from Jagadishpur to Arrah, the chief town of the Shahabad district, 
looted the treasury, and destroyed the English prisons, offices, and flags. At last they turned 
to a small fortress. The clever Englishmen of the place had stored in that fort arms, 
ammunition, and stores of provision in order to defend themselves in case of a rising. 
Besides, a detachment of fifty Sikhs had been sent from Patna to help the handful of 
Englishmen. While these men, about seventy-five in all, lay waiting in the fort fully prepared, 
the occasion for which they were waiting arrived and the Revolutionaries besieged the place. 
While these twenty-five Englishmen and fifty Sikhs were trying to defend the fort 
obstinately, the Revolutionaries, instead of assaulting it, were busy in shutting them 
completely on all sides. It is probable that they considered the place almost in their hands and 
3. “The Brahmins have incited him to mutiny and rebellion!” – Major Eyre’s Official 
Despatch. 
did not think it worth while to spend time and men in capturing it by general assault. They 
probably thought it more advantageous to look after the surrounding territory and other 
English camps. Partly for this and partly for the fierce artillery of the besieged, the Sepoys 
brought up their guns and began to use them instead of ordering a general assault. In one or 
two places, mines were laid and blown up with dynamite. In a few days, the water-supply in 
the fort was exhausted. But the Sikhs were too valiant to bear to see the miseries of the 
English. In twenty-four hours, they dug a new well in the fort! And, while this work was 
going on, they were, at the same time, fighting like demons. The Europeans would not agree 
to a conditional surrender, thinking of the fate of their Cawnpore comrades. When the Sepoys 
discovered that there were Sikhs, besides Feringhis, fighting within the fort, they grew wild 
with indignation. Because, then it was not alone the Sepoys that were besieging the English 
but it was Kumar Singh besieging the followers of Guru Govind Singh. The Sikhs were 
extraordinarily brave but basely treacherous to their country. Every evening, efforts were 
244 
made to bring them round to their duty. The messengers of the Revolutionaries would stand 
behind pillars and shout out to them words of advise : “O Sikhs! What hell do you look 
forward to by thus helping the Feringhis! They who have destroyed our kingdom, they who 
are violating our Mother-country, they who have insulted our religion! Fighting on their side, 
what hell do you look forward to?” The Revolutionaries would bind them with oaths of 
religion, of country, of interest, of freedom. They shouted heart-rending implorations to 
leavethe side of the Feringhi. They threatened to massacre them if they still persisted in 
acting treacherously and helping the foreign despots. Not only had all this no effect on the 
Sikhs, but the reply they would give was a shower of bullets, while the English clapped hands 
in applause shouting, “Bhale! Bhale!” (Well done!). Thus, the siege went on for three days. On the third night on the 29th, the English force was suddenly awakened by the noise of 
distant guns. Their faces beamed with smiles. Was it not the English army, coming to kill the 
Revolutionaries and raise the siege? Yes, it was the English army. About two hundred and 
seventy Englishmen of the English regiments at Danapur and about one hundred Sikhs under 
the valiant Captain Dunbar had come to the banks of the Shon river to raise the siege. Never 
was the English army so jubilant and hopeful of victory! The Englishmen and women who 
had come to see them off bade farewell to them, all smiles. The boats sailed smoothly on the 
Shon and, about seven in the evening, the army reached the outskirts of Arrah. The bright orb 
of the waxing moon, also, marched along with them to partake of their victory. Oh, Captain 
Dunbar! Arrange your troops properly while the moon is shining, for soon it will be dark. In 
this arrangement, as usual, the “loyal Sikhs” must be put in the front. They also stepped 
forward lightly. Where is the black guide who is to show the way in the thick jungles of 
Arrah? Put him forth, and then, oh victorious warriors! mArch on brandishing your swords in 
the bright moonlight. Trees were left behind, the ground was being covered, mile after mile 
was being crossed, and even the Arrah bridge is reached. But, what is this? Where is the 
enemy? How is this, that not a single Revolutionary has yet fallen? The cowards have run 
away! They have run away at the bare news that Dunbar is coming! Even Alexander did not 
inspite his enemies with such terror! Oh Moon! You have so long waited in cold and wind to 
witness the raging battle, but you have only seen the cleverness of the retreat of the 
Revolutionaries. Go, then; do not stay any longer to be disappointed; draw the curtain of 
night over this universe and retire to your resting place! But, though the moon went away, 
you, Dunbar! do not return! Here now comes the mango-grove and there is no more chance 
of encountering the Pandays. But, oh! What is this sound? May it not be the leaves of the 
mango-tree shaking in the wind? Whiz! Whiz!! Beware, Englishmen! Beware! A deluge of 
bullets from all sides! Every tree of the mango-grove had as if guns in its branches, smiting 
245 
the foreign Feringhis! Kumar Singh is come? The English army is prepared to fight; but, with 
whom? Not one man on the enemy’s side could be seen! In the thick mango-grove, in the 
weird darkness of the night, in the high and low places, Kumar Sing’s soldiers were hidden 
and not one could be seen! Nothing was visible except the stars in the sky and the trees on the 
earth! And it was not possible to fire at both these and gain victory! The wind-god was 
enraged and sent red-hot shots from somewhere foaming, into the English army! Fire from 
the left, fire from the right, and fire in front! The clothes of the English army were white and 
easily distinguishable but Kumar Singh’s men were dark, their clothes were dark, and the 
night was dark! If all the dark circumstances conspired together, how could the English hold 
to their feet? The white Englishmen and the dark Sikhs, both ran away from the field! Their 
commander, Dunbar, was one of the first to be killed. Running for life, the English army 
came into a ditch near by. There they tried to hold on for some time, but, about early 
morning, they left behind not only their dead but their wounded comrades on the field and 
commenced the fight to the Shon river, being thirsty, hungry, full of blood, and black with 
shame. But it was no easy matter to run away from Kumar Singh. At every step, blood began 
to flow. As a wild boar pierced by lances, dropping on this side and that through weakness, 
runs shedding streams of blood on the field – such was the English army when it came to the 
Shon river. But here, there was the climax of destruction. At first, they could not find their 
boats. After some time, they found that they had stuck in the sand. Those that there were not 
so stuck had been set fire to by the Pandays! At last, a couple of boats were saved. When the 
white population of Danapur came to the bank expecting to greet a victorious army singing 
war-songs, and bringing with them the rescued men of Arrah, they did not hear a single shout 
of joy from the boats. No flag, no band, not a single face uplifted! All hearts began to beat in 
impatience, “My son, my brother, my husband, my father left only yesterday for the field in 
all hopes; and to-day – God forbid the thought!” Before the prayer could reach Heaven, the 
unfortunate troops landed on the Ghat at Danapur, and soon the terrible news spread like 
lightning that, out of four hundred and fifteen men, only about fifty returned alive safe from 
the hands of Kumar Singh! An Englishman writes, “He who had heard the heart-rending cries 
of those English women will not forget it to this day! Some began tobeat their breasts, crying 
piteously, some shouted hoarsely, and some began to pull away their hair. If they had seen 
General Lloyd, the originator of this destructive plan, there is not the lease doubt that they 
would have lynched him!” 
But while the sky was being rent by the cries of these women at Danapur, Major Eyre was 
marching towards Arrah to revenge the defeat and their sorrow. Though he had not yet heard 
246 
of Dunbar’s defeat, he had marched straight towards Arrah, on hearing that the English there 
were besieged. While Kumar Singh’s Sepoys were returning after crushing Dunbar’s army on the 29th and 30th of July, they got the news that Eyre was advancing towards Arrah. The old 
commander got together his troops without losing a moment. He made the arrangements for 
fighting after taking advantage of every stragetic position on the route, and gave the last desperate battle on the 2nd of August, near the village of Bibiganj. Both armies endeavoured 
to take possession of a thick forest near by. In this race between youth and age, the aged 
Kumar Singh arrived first and, thus defeating Eyre’s plans, he opened a terrible dire. Eyre 
had three excellent guns and he was continually advancing on the strength of these. Thrice 
Kumar Singh’s men jumped at the guns. Thrice did they go almost near the mouth of the fire- 
spitting guns, but the English kept their artillery constantly firing. At that moment, Captain 
Hastings came up panting to the commander Eyre, and said, “Eyre, even the English infantry 
is being pushed back! Victory has slipped from us!” If this state had continued for half an 
hour more, the battle would have been Kumar Singh’s. Now, as anyhow the victory was 
going, the English wanted to try a last desperate attack before leaving the field. In this, Eyre 
ordered the English force to charge with bayonets. Immediately, the English soldiers rushed 
like arrows on the Revolutionaries. It cannot be understood why the Sepoys who would 
bravely rush up to the mouths of guns could not stand a general charge with bayonets, but it 
is certain that they did not withstand it. Eyre drove them out of the thicket and pushed 
forward, marched up to the fortress at Arrah, and relieved the Englishmen besieged there. 
And the town of Arrah thus fell into English hands again. 
The siege of Arrah lasted only for eight days. In these eight days, the brave Rajput had to 
maintain the siege as well as fight two battles. His extraordinary courage spirit, and bravery 
were not matched by the bravery of his followers, and so, after suffering defeat at Eyre’s 
hands, Kumar Singh had to retreat to Jagadishpur. But when he heard that the English army, 
reinforced by the lately besieged troops at Arrah, were swelling considerably, he began to 
collect together all the available fighting men at Jagadishpur. The English by this time had 
seen not a little of Kumar Singh’s activity. Fearing that he might again march on Arrah, Eyre 
forestalled him and himself started towards Jagadishpur. Kumar Singh was greatly 
handicapped and recognised that it was impossible, with his disheartened followers, to 
oppose in open battle the English army, well-disciplined and victorious, and that, too, near a 
capital town. He, therefore, decided to use guerilla tactics and, after two sharp skirmishes, 
came out of Jagadishpur. And Eyre, with the English army, pitched his tent in Kumar Singh’s palace on the 14th of August! Though the English destroyed the palace, the Hindu temples, 
247 
and other buildings at Jagadishpur, still, the idol of the temples, the king of the palaces, and 
the owner of the buildings, Kumar Singh, was as unconquerable after the battle as before it. 
Other kings might be cowed down by the fall of their capitals, but the king of Jagadishpur 
was not of that sort. His motto was, “Wherever I am, there is Jagadishpur!” So, to hold 
Jagadishpur without capturing him was only a vain endeavour. Now that his home was lost – 
the battlefield itself had become his home. 
CHAPTER-IV DELHI FALLS 
WHEN the third chief commander of the English army before Delhi became hopeless of 
taking the town and resigned, Brigadier-General Wilson replaced him. At that time, in the 
camp of the English army maddened by the attacks of the Revolutionaries, it was seriously 
discussed, in despair, whether the siege should be raised. It is difficult to say what would 
have been the course of the Revolution of 1857 if this plan had been resolved upon. Still, it is 
clear that this one movement on the part of the English would have harmed their cause more 
than many defeats at the hands of the Revolutionaries. The English had a strategic advantage 
in thus besieging the town of Delhi, because the Revolutionary army was shut up there in one 
248 
place. If that vast host had spread over the province instead of being thus bottled up and had 
harassed the English after forming small detachments everywhere, this guerilla warfare 
would have soon reduced the small English force to impotence. But Delhi being besieged, the 
battlefield was restricted, the English force had not to put up with an unbearable strain, and 
the Revolutionaries were inconveniently huddled up together in one city and thus were more 
liable to attack. In these circumstances, to raise the siege of Delhi was to break the dam and 
let the Revolutionary forces inundate the whole country. Even if Delhi were captured, the 
Sepoys would no doubt have spread all around. But there was a vast difference between 
driving them out of Delhi, defeated and dejected, and making them elated by raising the siege 
and allowing them to fall upon the English. Though the English commander thoroughly 
understood this difference, despair, discouragement, and the fierce onslaughts of the 
Revolutionaries made him think of raising the siege. At that moment, the English power in 
India hung in the balance. It was, indeed, fortunate for the English that there was, at this time, 
a bold and desperately courageous officer like Baird-Smith in the English camp outside 
Delhi. When all other officers were thinking of a retreat, he said with determination, “We 
must not release our hold of Delhi even by an inch! Our noose, fallen round her neck like 
cruel death, must be constant and thorough! If we raise the siege of Delhi, the Panjab will be 
out of hand, India will be gone, and the Empire ruined forever!” 
Encouraged by the words of Baird-Smith, Brigadier Willson determined not to turn back 
without taking Delhi. The Revolutionaries, on the other hand, sustained the siege with rate 
ability and courage. They would make a sudden sortie, attack either the right or the left wing, 
kill as many people as possible, and retreat qhickly when the English rose vigorously to repel 
the attack. When the English army would have been decoyed near the fort in pursuit of the 
Sepoys, the Revolutionary guns would at once open a tremendous fire. With these tactics, the 
Revolutionaries so often deceived the English and killed so many of their number that 
Brigadier Wilson had to issue a special order that on no account was a pursuit of the Sepoys 
to be attempted. As the English numbers began to dwindle by this new ruse of the 
Revolutionaries, their commander’s eyes were turned towards the expected siege-train from 
the Panjab. All means of communication in North Hindusthan – telegraphs, railways, and 
posts – were completely destroyed, and the English army at Delhi was as much besieged as 
the Revolutionaries. The English had no adequate knowledge as to what was going on in the 
south of Delhi, or as to where the army sent from Calcutta had arrived, or as to the state of 
affairs in the towns of Lucknow, Cawnpore, Benares, and other places. A month after Sir 
Hugh Wheeler was killed, the English army at Delhi god ‘reliable’ information that he was 
249 
hastening to come to their help! There was no hope of getting any reinforcements from 
Calcutta and the whole strain fell upon the Panjab. Sir John Lawrence had borne his burden 
well and had often sent reinforcements of English as well as Sikh soldiers. This time, too, he 
did not refuse the new request for a siege-train and more reinforcements but sent two 
thousand troops under the command of Nicholson. When the news of the arrival of this army 
reached the English camp at Delhi, every face beamed with joy, hope, and encouragement. 
The fact that Nicholson was the commander encouraged them more than that two thousand 
soldiers were coming. A leader like Nicholson is worth thousands of soldiers! In the 
dispirited English ranks, everyone would say, “Now that Nicholson is coming, there is no 
doubt about the victory!” 
As the acquisition of good leaders removed the doubts as to victory in the English camp, so 
the lack of good leaders among the Revolutionaries made their defeat more and more certain. 
The Emperor, whom they had set upon a rejuvenated throne, though of praiseworthy qualities 
of kindness and mercy fit for times of peace, was quite inexperienced in war and unequal to 
military leadership. There was no lack of brave Sepoys at Delhi. Those who had even 
surpassed English troops in warfare when fighting on their side, those who had learnt their 
drill and discipline under the English themselves, those whose swords had extended English 
rule right up to Afghanistan - there were fifty thousand of such heroes within the walls of 
Delhi. But there was wanted at least one capable head to command and lead the victory these 
fifty thousand men. All honour to these fifty thousand men who fought and failed. The 
wonder is that they held on for so long without a capable leader to lead them! Even the old 
Emperor whom they had placed on the throne was as anxious to find a good leader for them 
as they were themselves. He tried many experiments, but they did not work. He gave all the 
power in the hands of Bakht Khan. He appointed three generals to manage the army. He then 
ordered that a committee of six- three Delhi citizens and three Sepoy leaders – should 
together look after all the affairs of the army. And when this representative council also 
proved fruitless, the noble and patriotic Emperor, fearing that, perhaps, the Revolution was 
being destroyed on account of his fault and that capable men were leaving his side on account 
of his being at the head, announced publicly that he was ready to give up all his power and 
abdicate. Rather than India come back under the English, rather than the constantly wheeling 
vulture of foreign domination tear the entrails of long – suffering India, rather than India be 
always submerged in the mire of slavery, the old Mogul proclaimed that the rule of any man 
over Hindusthan who would give her freedom and Swaraj would be a hundred times more 
pleasing to him than the continuance of his own rule. He sent letters written in his own hand 
250 to the Rajas of Jeypore, Jodhpur, Bikaneer, Alwar, etc. “ It is my ardent wish to see that the 
Feringhi is driven out of Hindusthan by all means and at any cost. It is my ardent wish that 
the whole of Hindusthan should be free. But the Revolutionary War that has been wages for 
this purpose cannot be crowned with success unless a man capable of sustaining the whole 
burden of the movement, who can organise and concentrate the different forces of the nation 
and will unify the whole people in himself, comes forward to guide this rising. I have no 
desire left in me of ruling over India, after the expulsion of the English, to my own personal 
aggrandisement. If all of you native Rajas are ready to unsheath your sword to drive away the 
enemy, then, I am willing to resign my Imperial powers and authority in the hands of any confederacy of the native princes who are chosen to exercise it.”4 
This is the letter written by the leader of Indian Mahomedans, the Emperor of Delhi to the 
Hindu kings in India! This unique and typical letter shows how the noble words – 
Swatantrya, Swaraj, Swadesh, and Swadharma – were thoroughly understood in Hindusthan. 
Seeing the religious instincts of Hindus and Mahomedans thus completely united together in 
patriotic harmony, Charles Ball says, “Such unexpected, surprising, and extraordinary 
transformation is rarely to be seen in the history of the world!” 
4. Thed autograph letter:- Native Narrative by Metcalfe, p. 226. 
But this extraordinary transformation had been completely effected only in one province of 
the vast land of Hindusthan, and the immediate result of the Proclamation was not a perfect 
success. Though it is in the main, and in this sense, true that, before the walls of Delhi, a fight 
was going on between freedom and slavery, in another and in an important sense, we can say 
that there never was a true fight there between Indians and Feringhis as such. The author of 
the famous work The Siege of Delhi, says, “There were four times as many natives as 
Europeans in the artillery. For every European horseman there were two native horsemen. It 
was not possible to move a step without the help of the natives.” The vigorous life in one part 
of the country was killed by the treacherous activity in other parts. In spite of this, even 
towards the end of August, the Revolutionaries gave the English no opportunity to attack, but 
always pursued the offensive and continuously directed attacks on the English camp. This is 
not a mean indication of their devotion to the principle of Swaraj. 
251 
While all this heroic devotion on the part of the Revolutionaries was rendered powerless for 
want of a capable leader, the camp of the enemy got the advantage of a commander like 
Nicholson. Now was to be seen, for the first time, a shadow of despair in Delhi. The armies 
of Neemuch and Bareilly began to accuse each other for the present state of affairs; and 
riotous Sepoys, though regularly paid clamoured for more pay and threatened to loot the rich 
men of the town if their demands were not satisfied. Then, at the command of the Emperor, 
Bakht Khan assembled together the Sepoy leaders, Sepoys, and prominent citizens and asked 
them the question, “War or surrender!” At once, the cry went ringing up to the sky, “War, 
War, War!” (Ladhai!) At this display of enthusiasm there was hope everywhere, and the 
Revolutionary army, not excepting the Bareilly and Neemuch Sepoys, marched towards 
Najafgarh to attack and carry the English siege-train. After reaching Najafgarh, the Neemuch 
army would not encamp where the Bareilly brigade was encamped; and, instead of preparing 
to fall together on the enemy, they disobeyed Bakht Khan’s orders and encamped at a 
neighbouring village. When the English heard this news, the new commander, Nicholson, 
took a select and sufficient force and marched in all haste towards Najafgarh. He suddenly 
attacked the Neemuch brigade which had encamped at a distance disobeying the orders of 
Bakht Khan. The Revolutionaries were lying scattered, unprepared, and unformed – the 
attack was cautious and well-ordered and under the command of Nicholson! The destruction 
of the Neemuch sepoys was complete. They fought; they fought with great courage; they 
fought with such bravery that the enemy applauded them. But this was vain bravery! The 
Revolutionaries had never suffered such a defeat since the battle of Bundelki-Serai. The 
whole Neemuch brigade fell this day on the field! This was the fruit of self-willed action and 
disobedience of the orders of their own elected commander! Undisciplined bravery is as 
useless as cowardice! 
This victory of the 25th of August removed altogether the cloud of despair in the English 
Camp. This was their only real victory since the month of June. Everyone was anxious now 
to assault Delhi. Commander Wilson gave the order to Baird-Smith to prepare the plan of the 
final attack. This Baird-Smith who, by his persistence, had retained the English army at Delhi 
when it was thinking of raising the siege, prepared the map as ordered. The new siege-train 
from the Panjab also arrived safely in the English camp. The English commander sent a 
message to his troops in the following strain. “This city of Delhi has baulked the English 
army and three generals’ military skill for the last three months! The time has certainly come 
near when your efforts up to now will be rewarded by the razing to dust of that city!” 
252 
After the arrival of reinforcements from the Panjab, the English army consisted of three 
thousand and five hundred English soldiers, five thousand Sikhs, Panjabees, etc., two 
thousand and five hundred Kashmiris -–altogether eleven thousand men. Besides, the Raja of 
Jhind himself was there, with hundreds of his men to assist in the fall of Delhi. In the first 
half of September, the English commander assumed the offensive andbegan to construct new 
batteries. This produced consternation among the Delhi Sepoys. While, outside the walls, the 
English were steadily advancing in good order, inside there was a climax of disorder, 
anarchy, and disobedience among the Indian troops! The Indians on the English sided worked 
so arduously in the work of constructing the battery, in spite of the artillery-fire of Delhi, that 
Forrest writes, “The natives excelled in steady and unparallelled bravery. When man after 
man was being killed, they would keep up their work. If the man in front was killed by a 
bomb, they would stop for a moment, shed a tear or two for the dead, put the new body in the 
line of corpses, and begin work again in that terrible place!” The Indians under the English 
worked with such discipline, while those in the town of Delhi shirked their work. From this 
difference, what a lesson has to be learnt! Honouring the officers and obeying their word of 
order is the very essence of discipline. But this principle was being trampled down 
everywhere at Delhi. Most of the fault lay on the incapable officers and the rest on disorderly sepoys, and, now, there was disheartening despair to crown all! The 14th September came. 
The English army was divided into four coloumns – three under Nicholson stood on the right 
to force the Kabul gate and enter Delhi. 
When the sun rose, the English guns which had been so long shattering the walls stopped 
suddenly. There was a dead silence for a moment in the English camp and immediately the 
force under Nicholson dashed against the wall. The first column went up to the breach which 
had been effected in the Kashmir Bastion. From within, the guns of the Revolutionaries kept 
up a hot fire. The English fell in heaps one upon another in the trenches but some reached the 
walls. A ladder was placed over the wall and the English army began to scale up the latter. 
The Revolutionaries fought desperately and shot down hundreds after hundreds of the 
Feringhi army. But the English force pushed on in spite of the terrible onslaught. At last, the 
English affected a big breach and carried it. Delhi’s walls yielded and the bugle of victory 
sounded! 
In the same manner, near the breach at the Water-Bastion also, there was a terrible hand to 
hand fight, and the second column, killing and dying at every step,. Carried the breach and 
jumbed inside the city. 
253 
The third column was marching towards the Kashmir gate. When Lieutenants Home and 
Salkeld came in front of the gate to blow it up with dynamite, from the walls, from the 
windows, from everywhere came a perfect shower of grape. The draw-bridge over the trench 
in front of the Kashmir gate is broken. Only one plank remains. Enough, march forward on it, 
one by one! The sergeant is killed, this Mahadoo has fallen – but, Home, rush forth. Home 
ran forth and placed the dynamite near the gate. Others then rushed forward on the plank to 
apply the fire to it. Lieutenant Salkeld has fallen, shot by a bullet; rush forth, you, Captain 
Burgess; why, you are also shot; never mind, the hero has set fire to it, even as he was dying! 
A terrible crash like thunder! The Kashmir gate was blown up by the terrific force of the 
dynamite. But even this sound was not heard, in the din of battle, by the English commander 
who was waiting for the Kashmir gate to open! Should he advance or should he not? But, 
though he had not heard the bugle of victory, he had not the slightest doubt about the success 
of the English heroes who had rushed forth. After waiting for a time, he marched forth. With 
absolute confidence in his soldiers, Campbell gave the order for an assault. The troops came 
near the ditches. They saw their victorious and dying comrades in the ditches, rushed through 
the breach in the Kashmir gate, and jumped into Delhi. 
The fourth column under Major Ried had started from the English right to take the Kabul 
gate. When it reached Sabzi Mandi, it met the Sepoys who had come out of Delhi to oppose 
it. Major Reid fell in the first encounter, the English advance was checked, there was 
confusion in the English camp, the Revolutionaries were elated, and it seemed that the 
English would be routed. But Hope Grant brought up the cavalry and the battle again became 
equal. Though the English artillery opened a terrible fire from every house and garden of 
Kishenganj, the Revolutionaries sent bullets flying and shed pools of blood. The English 
cavalry also found it impossible to advance. But it was also impossible to return for fear that 
the Revolutionaries might capture the guns. The English cavalry stuck to their posts to die. 
Not a man moved from his place, except by death. Of the grand bravery and discipline of the 
Indian cavalrymen, their commander, Hope Grant, says: “The native cavalrymen remained 
firm. Their valour is unparalleled. When I began to encourage them, they said: Do not be 
anxious! We will stand this fire as long as you wish!” 
Equal bravery was shown by the Indians who were fighting for love of country and freedom. 
The infuriated Revolutionaries, fighting every inch of space, made a great effort near the 
Idgarh. More and more desperate attacks. When the English force, trying to capture Idgarh, 
254 
was wavering, the Revolutionaries delivered another fierce attack. The English retired. The 
Revolutionaries pursued, vigorously attacking them all the way, up to their guns and cavalry. 
Now, at last,. The English forces are leaving the field after abandoning the position which 
they held so long! Bravo, Revolutionaries, bravo! You have shown a splendid fight! If all of 
you had been as brave, and as disciplined! – 
While the fourth column was being thus foiled, the three English columns that had entered 
Delhi waited for a short time at the Kashmir gate and then rushed forth to attack the town. 
The three chief commanders, Campbell, Jones, and Nicholson, taking their followers, fought 
their way to the Kabul gate. The guns found in the way were captured; on every tower and 
pillar was placed a British flag, and the force went fighting right up to the Burn Bastion. But, 
from this place onwards, instead of empty gund, lifeless hillocks, and vacant fields, they 
encountered the fierce war-cry of the Revolutionary force. The Revolutionaries opened a 
terrible fire; fierce bloodshed and death marked every foot of ground they covered; the 
English army which had advanced far in the heat of victory was forced back beaten. When 
thus the English force received this check, Nicholson dashed forth like a tiger. His motto was 
nothing is impossible, in this world, to a brave warrior. When the irritated Nicholson left the 
Water Bastion and again entered the Gully – the bloody battle was renewed. Whichever 
Englishman stepped forth was shot down by the Revolutionaries fighting for freedom. From 
the roofs, from the windows, from the porches, from the verandahs, this obstinate, freedom- 
loving Gully began to pour forth fire and forced even Nicholson to retire. The brave Major 
Jacob also fell in it! Now, rush forth, Nicholson! All other English officers, except you, have 
been killed by this Gully! Oh! freedom-loving Gully! Nicholson himself is coming forth – 
now is the true test! The fight began in a dead encounter. Suddenly, there was a cry in the 
English army, as if it had been struck by lightning descending upon it! Nicholso, Nicholson! 
Where is he now? Some brave Sepoy had singled him out and his him – and he was rolling 
on the ground! There was an uproar – “Hato” (Retire!) in the English army, and “Chato” (Cut 
down!)” in the Sepoy ranks! The dreadful Gully! Every inch of her length was the grave of an 
Englishmen! 
Hardly did this column of the English army retreat through this heroic Gully and reach the 
Kashmir gate, when the bugle also sounded for the retreat of the column which had gone 
towards Jumma Musjid. Though there was no resistance till the mosque was reached, as soon 
as the troop came there, a terrible war-cry was heard and, in the subsequent fight, Campbell 
was wounded. 
255 
Thus ended the first day of the assault on Delhi. Of the four columns, three had their chief 
commanders wounded; sixty-six officers, and eleven hundred and four soldiers were killed! 
Reckoning in the evening the advantages gained at this expense, the English commander, 
Wilson, found that hehad taken only one-forth of Delhi! Fear, despair, and anxiety maddened 
general Wilson and he said that an immediate retreat must be ordered. “The town is yet 
unconquered; and thousands of the Revolutionaries are proudly inviting those that remain 
alive to come forth for battle. Shall we now sacrifice everyone of us or suffer the ignominy of 
defeat? We must now retreat!” – such was the opinion of Wilson. 
When the dying Nicholson who had been taken to the hospital heard the news, that hero said, 
“Retreat! By God’s grace, I have still strength enough in me to shoot the retreating Wilson!” All the living Englishmen agreed with this dying hero and, on the night of the 14th of 
September, the English troops stuck to the posts they had conquered. 
The English council of war overruled General Wilson’s opinion as to retreat. The movements 
in the Revolutionary camp itself that night showed that the force of the Revolutionaries was 
spent. One party declared that it was better to give up Delhi and renew the war in the 
province, and the other insisted that Delhi should never be surrendered, even if everyone of 
them was killed. In the English camp whatever the diffrerences of opinion, the majority was 
always respected and the differences were merged in the unanimity of action. This virtue, 
however, was conspicuous in the confused Sepoy ranks by its absence, and the two parties, 
instead of uniting to form a common plan of action, went each their own way. Some Sepoys 
left Delhi, but others resolved not to go back and inch till the end, stuck to Delhi, and came out on the battle-field ready. This party fought for Delhi from the 15th to the 24th of 
September! And that too, with such determination, such bravery, and such steadiness that, 
when an English detachment would enter a mosque or a place, a guardsman would stand with 
his hand on the trigger, would aim calmly when the English came near, and would fire the 
last shot for his country and religion when they approached him. After doing this last service 
for his motherland, he would court death! 
When three fourths of Delhi fell into the hands of the English, the commander-in-chief at 
Delhi, Bakht Khan,went to the Emperor and said, “Delhi has now slipped out of our hands. 
But this does not mean that all changes of victory are over. Even now, the plan of harassing 
the enemy in the open country rather than protecting an enclosed place is certain to bring 
256 
victory in the end. I am going to fight my way out of Delhi, after selecting the warriors who 
are ready to keep their swords drawn till the end in this war of liberty. I think it more 
advisable to go out fighting rather than surrender to the enemy. At this time, you should also 
come with us, and under your banner, we will fight to the last for Swaraj.” If this old Mogul 
had even a hundredth part of the valour of Babar, Humayun, or Akbar in him, he would have 
accepted this valiant invitation and would have marched out of Delhi with the valiant Bakht 
Khan. If he was to die, he would have died like a king. But despairing on account of old age, 
slow on account of long enjoyment of luxuries, and frightened by defeat, the Emperor 
Bahadur Shah maintained an undetermined and vacillating attitude till the end. On the last 
day, he did himself in Humayun’s grave, and, after refusing Bakht Khan’s invitation, began 
to decide upon surrender to the English, according to the advice of Ilahi Baksh Mirza. This 
Ilahi Baksh was a first-class traitor! He gave the news to the English, who immediately sent 
thither Captain Hodson. After a promise to spare his life, the Emperor surrendered, was 
brought to the palace by the English, and imprisoned. Just then, the traitorous dogs, Ilahi 
Baksh and Munshi Rajab Ali, came up running and said, “But the princes are yet hiding in 
Humayun’s tomb!” Again, Hodson ran; the princes surrendered to him, were put in a 
carriage, and taken to the town. As soon as the cavalcade entered the town, Hodson ran up to 
the carriage and shouted out that those who killed English women and children deserved 
death alone. So saying, Hodson turned towards the surrendered princes, who were dragged 
out of the carriage, and robbed of all valuables on the person, and helpless stood before him. 
Three shots put an end to the lives of the three princes! Hodson cut away this last sprout of 
Timur’s family! But his revenge was not satisfied by simply shooting dead these illustrious 
princes. It is only savages that wreak a vengeance till death. If Hodson had stopped there, 
where would be the humanity of civilised English vindictiveness? Therefore, the dead bodies 
of the prionces were thrown right before the police station. When the vultures had fed on 
them for some time, the rotting bodies were dragged and thrown into the river. Oh Time! 
what changes are wrought by thee! That there should be no one to given the last burial rites to 
the descendants of the great Emperor Akbar! And now, the Sikhs thought that the prophecy in 
their books was fulfilled! But, in what way? By what means? To what end? For whose 
benefit? 
Then began terrible looting and a general massacre at Delhi. After hearing the accounts, Lord 
Elphinstone writes to Sir John Lawrence, “After the siege was over, the outrages committed 
by our army are simply heart-rending. A wholesale vengeance is being taken without 
257 
distinction of friend and foe. As regards the looting, we have indeed surpassed Nadir Shah!”5 
General Outram was of opinion that Delhi should be burnt! 
The English army, both European and Indian, engaged at the siege of Delhi, was about ten 
thousand men. Of those, about four thousand fell on the field, killed and wounded. Such a 
terrible death-roll is not found even in a struggle like the Crimean war! Though it is 
impossible to form a reliable estimate of the losses of the Revolutionaries from English accounts, they must have been five to six thousand.6 
In this manner this historical town, inspired by the noble sentiments of Swadharma and 
Swaraj, fought with a powerful enemy like the English for a hundred and thirty-four days and 
nights. On the whole, the fight was one befitting a high and exalted principle! From the day 
on which Delhi threw away the Feringhi flag from her walls and proclaimed the 
establishment of Swaraj, from the day on which Delhi smashed the chains of slavery and 
established freedom, from the day on which Delhi first pronounced the formula of unity for 
5. Life of Lawrence, Vol. II, page 262. 
6. Rotton says : “The casualties of the mutineers were often manifested beyond all 
due bounds.” – Page 175. 
the vast and extended continent of Hindusthan under a national banner, from that day onward, 
to the day on which English swords drank Swadeshi blood in the palace of Bahadur Shah, 
this town had done not a few deeds of noble and unselfish heroism befitting the holy was of 
freedom! Without a leader, without good organisation, having to fight a well-trained enemy 
like the English, and having to oppose Swadeshi swords no less brave, - why, braver than the 
Feringhi ones – ready to pronounce upon their compatriots – inspite of all these 
disadvantages, the Revolutionaries fought a splendid fight. But disunion and want of 
organisation – the result of the lack of a great leader filled their camp and greatly 
handicapped them. Despite all these enormous difficulties, the Sepoys at Delhi fought like 
real national and religious martyrs. Their virtues, and even their faults, will be looked upon 
with reverence by future generations! “The elephant breaking his tusk, in trying to smash a 
mountain, is noble!” Throughout all the faults and all the virtues lurks constantly the fire of 
258 
the love of Swadharma and Swaraj and freedom and sacrifice for a noble principle. And so, 
both these are living sermons on moral heroism! 
CHAPTER-V LUCKNOW 
ON the day on which the Revolutionaries were successful in the battle of Chinhat, the 
English power in Oudh came to an end and the revolt had openly assumed the form of a 
national Revolution. The Sepoys, princes, and people began by establishing a ruler liked by 
them on the vacant throne of Lucknow. The anarchy which raged everywhere for the space of 
a week after the battle of Chinhat had to be first suppressed before preparations for war could 
be made. Therefore, the Revolutionaries set themselves to the task of administration at 
Lucknow, though the week’s interval gave an opportunity to the English of fortifying their 
259 
defences. The late Nabob of Lucknow, Wajid Ali Shah, being a prisoner of the English at 
Calcutta, they unanimously elected and placed on the throne his son, Prince Birjis Kadir. This 
Birjis Kadar being a minor, the regency of the kingdom of Oudh was given in the hands of 
his mother, Queen Hazrat Mahal. As in the palace of Delhi, on account of the extreme old age 
of Emperor Bahadur Shah, the affairs of state were looked after by Begum Zinat Mahal in the 
Emperor’s name, so in the palace at Lucknow, the Nabob being a minor, the Government 
depended on his mother, Begum Hazrat Mahal. This Begum of Oudh, thought not quite 
another Lakshmi Bai, was undoubtedly a great organiser, full of love of liberty and the spirit 
of daring. She had perfect confidence in an Omrah (nobleman) of the court, called Mahbub 
Khan. She appointed various officers to the judicial, revenue, police, and military 
departments. These officers selected were such as were loved and honoured by the 
representatives of the Sepoys, by Mahbub Khan and other leaving Sirdars, and also by the 
large numbers of the people who hurried from all parts of Oudh to Lucknow to join in the 
great War of Independence. Every day, a Durbar was held to discuss political affairs, and 
there, the Begum Sahiba exercised authority in the name of the Nabob. The news that Oudh 
was free and that not a trace of English rule remained there was sent to the Emperor of Delhi, 
under the Begum’s seal, along with valuable presents. Letters were sent to all the 
neighbouring Zemindars and vassal Rajas to come to Lucknow with armed followers. From 
the appointment of the various civil officers, from the good order in all the departments of 
Government, from the daily Durbars, and other signs, it was apparent that the revolt had 
ended and constructive government had begun. But, unfortunately, the Revolutionaries did 
not show as much zeal in obeying the officers appointed as they showed in participating in 
their appointment. In all Revolutions this common blunder is committed, and this sows the 
seeds of destruction of the Revolution in the very beginning. Every Revolution is started by 
cutting down the laws of existing authority by the sword. But when once the habit is formed 
of mowing down by the sword the unjust laws of unconstitutional authority, then in the heat 
of the moment, the vicious habit develops of setting at nought all laws at will. The sword 
used for destroying wicked and cruel laws tends to destroy all law. The heroes, who start out 
for overthrowing foreign rule, soon get into the habit of overthrowing all rule. In the 
excitement of breaking the bonds of foreign rule, they begin to dislike all bonds, even those 
of just and normal rule. And in this way, Revolution ends in Anarchy, virtue in vice, and 
what ought to be a great benefit ends in loss. The destruction of individuals, of society, and of 
kingdoms is caused as much by anarchy as by foreign rule, as much by the absence of any 
bond as by the presence of cruel bonds. If any Revolution forgets this sociological truth, it 
generally kills itself in the end. Just as a man who begins to take wine as a cure for some 
260 distemper does not get rig of the habit of drinking wine even after he is cured; similarly, the 
habit of breaking bonds, in order to remove bad rule, persists even after its work is done and 
makes men disorderly and anarchical. That Revolution which destroys injustice and 
oppression is holy. But when a Revolution roots out one kind of injustice and oppressions but 
plants, at the same moment, the seeds of another kind, it becomes at once unholy and the 
seeds of destruction accompanying that sin soon put an end to its life. 
Therefore, those who want to take the wine of Revolution to cure the disease of foreign 
slavery must be on their guar not to get addicted to the vicious habit. The mind must be 
trained from the beginning to honour one’s own rule as much as to hate foreign rule. In 
wiping out foreign misrule, care must be taken to discourage, by all possible means, internal 
disorder. In smiting down foreign rule and foreign authority, one’s own rule and authority 
should be be worshiped as sacred. The moment the foreign power is destroyed, in order to 
guard the country from the evils of anarchy, a constitution liked by the majority of the people 
should be at once established and that constitution should be obeyed with reverence by all. 
The orders of all officers thus appointed must be implicitly carried out, discipline must be 
observed, individual caprice must give way to devotion to the principle of the common good 
and, if any change in this constitution is thought desirable and just it must be attempted only 
by means of the voice of the majority. In short, the rule should be Revolution outside and 
Constitution within, chaos outside and cosmos within, sword outside and law within. 
These elementary principles of all constitutions so necessary for the success of Revolutions 
were fairly well observed in the first half of the Rising. Immediately after the Revolution 
began, attention was given to organise administration with all possible speed at Delhi, 
Lucknow, Cawnpore, and other cities. In all these big towns, no imposter set himself up with 
the desire of individual aggrandisement. The undoubted hereditary and popular rulers were 
set up on the various thrones. These rulers did not even evince any desire to take advantage of 
the Revolution to further their own selfish ends and increase their power. Nay, more; written 
documents are published which prove that they were ready to relinquish all their rights if their persons were in the way of the country’s independence.1 Thus, in 1857, the first part of 
constructive administration was successfully achieved in a spirit of adorable nobility. But, in 
this organisation, the important and major section being composed of common sepoys, they 
began to feel all bonds unbearable when they had once removed the shackles of foreign rule. 
And, at the time of the crisis, all discipline became lax. Therefore, even those officers, whom 
they appointed at the first impulse of the ideal of Swaraj, they later on insulted, disobeyed, 
261 
and mocked. And thus, the Revolution tended to end in anarchy. Under these circumstances, 
had there arisen a hero who, by his individual prowess and the might of his all-conquering 
sword, could have won the hearts or awe of those followers who, incapable of being unified 
by an abstract ideal, could have still been bound together by a common hero-worship, the 
Revolution might have been crowned with success. But, in the absence of such a hero on the 
one side and the inherant tendency of an uncontrolled Revolution to lapse into anarchy on the 
other, there were more rabble than disciplined soldiers in the army of the kingdon of Oudh. 
The martyrs, by their undaunted, unconquered, and unconquerable determination to do and 
die, kept the field busin for three years! In the camp at Lucknow, the men of the first kind 
were much more numerous than those of the second, and the orders of several officers 
appointed by Begum Hazrat Mahal were never strictly obeyed. And the Sepoys became 
impudent, oppressive, disorderly, and self-willed. 
But still some brave heroic spirit who were staying among them inspired the Sepoys with 
their bravery, noble ideas, and natural excellence of spirit. And as these valiant men insisted, it was resolved to make the first great attack on the besieged Residency on the 20th of July. 
On the morning of the 20th of July, the Revolutionary artillery which had been very actgive so 
long, suddenly stopped firing. About eight o’clock, the Revolutionary party laid some mines 
1. See page 273, above. 
under the Residency walls and filled them with dynamite. The mines were blown up and the 
Sepoy ranks rushed forth after the explosion. At the same time, the guns again began a 
terrible fire on the English. The Revolutionary army fell upon the English from different 
directions – toward the Redan, on the house of Innes, on the Cawnpore Battery. The part of 
the army which attacked the Cawnpore battery made a desperate rush on the English guns. 
Again and again, they rushed against the guns. Their heroic leader, fluttering the flag of 
Swaraj in his hand, jumbed into the ditch and called upon the others to follow, shouting, 
“Chalo, Bahadur! Chalo!” (Come, brave men, come!) He crossed the ditch and began to plant the Revolutionary flat on English guns!2 But this brave soldier was soon shot down by an 
English bullet. Instead of thousands rushing forth over his dead body at this time and 
avenging the death of the martyr the crowd of camp followers retreated instead of advancing. 
But, bravo! You ladder-men! You did not imitate the cowardly camp-followers but rushed 
262 
forth like real Sepoys. Plant the ladders in the ditch and mount up quickly in spite of the first 
of the English! Thew first batch has fallen – but let the next one come. But are the others who 
dare risk it? This is the difference between the English army and the Revolutionaries! The 
English never allowed the blood of their comrades to be shed in vain; if one falls, ten rush 
forward in his place. We do not care where those who fled behing will go do; but, you heroes, 
you martyrs, you have reached Heaven! Those who took the flag of Swaraj in their own 
hands; in order that it might not be polluted by the touch of cowardly living corpses, those 
who went up to put that flat on the enemy’s fire-spitting guns, by their glorious, holy blood – 
that flag will be eternally pure and shine with a divine splendour! The flag of Swaraj looks its 
best only in such wounded and bleeding arms! One whose wrists are not bespattered with 
blood should not touch and pollute the holy flag of independence! 
After this first assault was repulsed, the Revolutionaries had, daily, small skirmishes with the 
English. They did their best in dynamiting the houses in the Residency. From above, the fire 
of terrible guns, and from below, dynamite explosions! No Englishman was sure when the 
ground beneath his feet would burst and swallow him. According to Brigadier Innes’s 
calculation, the Revolutionaries dynamited the Residency thirty-seven times! The 
Revolutionary guns were, also, constantly active. The Sepoys would send splendidly aimed 
shots against the English and the English would reply to them. There were death-dealing 
2. Gubbins’s Mutinies, page 218 
fights between bands of scouts which set out at night to get secret information from the 
opposite camps. Often, the secret whisperings of a group of men either within or without the 
walls were heard by the other party and nullified their plans. The Revolutionaries amused 
themselves often by aiming a ball exactly at the English flag and destroying it. And the 
English, also, unfailingly hauled up a new one at the Residency as soon as night fell. At such 
ghastly jokes, the battlefield of Lucknow would open her terrible jaws and smile a deathly 
smile! Every night the messengers of the Revolutionaries would go hiding near a part of the 
fort occupied by the Sikhs or other Indians and ask them, “Why do you play the traitor 
(Nimak haram) with the nation and thrust the sword of the Feringhis into the bodies of your 
own brethren?” If any night these questions became persistent, the “loyal” Sikhs, to have 
some fun, would ask them to come near in order to converse better and, as soon as they came, 
would make an Englishman who had hitherto kept himself concealed stand up before them! 
263 
Seeing such treachery, the Revolutionaries would return cursing their baseness. Of all the 
splendid and unring shots among the Revolutionaries, an African eunuch who had been in the 
service of the late Nabob spread terror in the English Residency. He was nicknamed 
“Othello” by the English. 
About this time Major Banks who had taken charge of the office of chief commissioner of 
Oudh, after the death of Sir Henry Lawrence, also fell dead by the bullet of a Revolutionary. 
This was the second English chief commissioner killed duringthe siege! But on account of the 
fixed, regular, and orderly organisation of the English army, even during the uncertain terrors 
of a siege, the death of a commander had no more effect than the death of a common soldier 
as regards the efficiency of the army. When the second commissioner fell, Brigadier Inglis 
took charge as commissioner, and the work of defence went on as before. At this time, 
however, the losses, deaths, the removal of leaders, the scarcity of food, and the activity of 
the Revolutionaries had made the English at Lucknow fairly desperate, though not altogether 
hopeless. 
Just then Angad returned from Cawnpore! This Angad was an Indian formerly employed in 
the English army and now a pensioner. Since the siege of Lucknow, it had become 
impossible for any white messenger to go out and return with information. His white skin, his 
yellowish hair, and his blue eyes could never escape the swords of the Revolutionaries. 
Therefore, it became necessary to employ brown men on the English messages, and thus, 
many “loyal” brown messengers had been sent out from Lucknow. But, out of all these, only 
Angad returned alive! He did not bring any letter or anything else suspicious with him for 
fear of the Revolutionaries, but he gave commander Inglis the assurance that he had himself 
seen the English army set out from Cawnpore for the relief of Lucknow. Encouraged by this 
news, the English told Angad to go back and get a written reply. Angad left Lucknow on the 22nd and returned at eleven o’clock on the night of the 25th. With him was Havelock’s letter, 
“Havelock is coming with an army sufficient for all odds. Lucknow will be relieved in five or 
six days.” In order to furnish Havelock, who was coming to releive them, with all 
information, the English gave military plans and maps to Angad and told him to go to 
Havelock again. That marvellous scout again went to Havelock’s camp and delivered to him 
all the military maps of Lucknow. Now, all English eyes were turned towards the direction 
from which they expected Havelock’s victorious flag to march over the dead bodies of the 
Revolutionaries. They even heard some distant sounds of artillery-fire. Could they be 
Havelock’s guns? 
264 
The English had not long been fondly hoping that Havelock was coming to help them when 
they discovered that it meant a second assault from the Revolutionary side! The 
revolutionaries at first opened fire on the Cawnpore battery, Johannes’ House, Begum Kothi, 
and other places. On that day, the Revolutionary dynamite did splendid work. There was a 
tremendously big breach in the English wall, enough for a whole regiment to march in in 
good order. But where was the regiment that would go in? If the English had effected such a 
breacnh in the enemy’s wall, they would have captured the place in half an hour. Some 
heroes among the Revolutionaries fought bravely till two in the afternoon. The Indians on the 
English side, however, excelled in bravery, discipline, and contempt of death! What a 
misfortune! This bravery in treachery and this cowardice in patriotism! What a contrast! Run 
up, some one, to remove this stain! It is now five and the attack is almost repulsed, but run 
up, someone, though not for immediate victory at least for ever-lasting glory! Captain 
Saunders, beware! The furious march of heroes devoted to principle is coming! It is come; 
this band of infuriated heroes are marching straight on – they are obstructed by the English 
wall but they are trying bodily to push it away. The English, at this crisis, left their guns and 
took up their bayonets. Hail, Freedom! Some snatched away the bayonets with their own 
hands and at last, fallen a prey to an English bullet! But they have saved the disgrace of their 
country on the field and exhibited bravery admired even by enemies. The fight was such that 
the English themselves took photographs of these heroes who struggled to wrest away 
English bayonets from the walls and fought with the frenzy of lions till death! 
On the 18th of August, the Revolutionaries made another attack on the English. On this day, 
as usual, a breach was first made by dynamite and, then, the Revolutionaries rushed forth. 
Malleson writes :- “One of their officers, a very gallant fellow, sprang at once to the top of 
the breach and, waving his sword, called on his men to follow. Before, however, his 
summons was responded to, a bullet had laid him low. His place was instantly occupied by 
another, but he was as instantly killed. Etc., etc.” 
The bravery of the three men, as described even by Feringhis, was a match to Nicholson’s 
bravery at Delhi. But it went in vain on account of the timidity of their followers. Instead of 
pushing forth with redoubled vigour at the death of the three, the thousands behind them 
thought it prudent to retire. From this one event, what a lesson ought to be learnt? 
265 
These frequent attacks were not all. Before the terrible daily fire of artillery and guns, the 
English found it unbearable to hold out much longer in spite of the excellent assistance of the 
“loyal” Indians. Just then, Angad again returned to Lucknow! As the English commander was 
about to ask him, in eager joy, how far Havelock had marched according to his promise, the 
scout delivered to him Havelock’s letter, “I cannot come towards Lucknow for at least 
twenty-five days to come”! Nothing is more unbearable than despair following hope. Not 
only dying patients and emaciated women but soldiers and officers became extremely 
dispirited, sad, and frightened. A death-like shadow came over the whole English force. Food 
became dear and all were ordered to live on half-rations! Why this delay? Why is a warrior 
like Havelock not coming to such an important work as the relief of Lucknow? 
Without they delay of a moment, Havelock had left Cawnpore and crossed the Ganges as far back as the 29th of July, in order to save his comrades at Lucknow. He had a thousand and 
five hundred men and thirteen guns and had written a letter to assurance to them, promising 
to relieve them without fail within five or six days. But as soon as he crossed the Ganges and 
stepped into Oudh, the imaginary ease of the task began to melt away like a cloud! Every 
inch of the way through Oudh had risen in revolt! Every Zemindar had collected a few 
hundred men under him and had begun the fight for independence. Every village flew the 
national Revolutionary flag. Seeing this terrible state of affairs, Havelock became very much 
dejected in mind. He was dejected but he did not despair. He marched on. The 
Revolutionaries encountered him first at Onao but flew away soon. After this skirmish at 
Onao, Havelock gave his soldiers only time for eating and, after that, the march continued. At 
Bashiratganj, a second skirmish took place with a similar result, Havelock’s army fought two such skirmishes on the 29th and got the better of the Revolutionaries in both. 
But, was this a real victory? In one day, the handful of his army lost one sixth of its number. 
And the Revolutionaries were not in the least broken up. Nay, more; it is doubtful whether 
the Revolutionaries were really defeated and chased away or they had hit upon the new plan 
of harassing the enemy considerably without suffering any losses themselves! And just then 
the news had come that the Danapur sepoys had also joined the Revolution. This threatening state of affairs compelled Havelock to stop his forward march on the 30th and retire back to 
Mangalwar. 
Hearing that Havelock’s army had left Cawnpore, Nana Sahib Peshwa again resumed 
operations round about Cawnpore. While Havelock left Cawnpore and crossed the Ganges to 
266 
enter Outh, Nana Sahib left Oudh and was crossing the same river to re-enter Cawnpore! Not 
to be caught in this trap of Nana Sahib, Havelock had to remain encamped at Mangalwar till the 4th of August. Instead of Havelock driving the Revolutionaries within a week to the banks 
of the Gotami, Nana Sahib had made Havelock stick to the Ganges. Just then the 
Revolutionaries in his front came up again to Bashiratganj. Irritated by the persistent 
harassing, Havelock became desperate and started towards Lucknow with his troops. At 
Bashiratganj he again gave battle to the Revolutionaries and drove them away. But here, also, 
the question was whether it was a victory or a defeat. For, in this fight, havelock lost three 
hundred men and his troops were so fatigued that, instead of advancing towards Lucknow, he 
began to retire on the Ganges. On that day, out of the one thousand and five hundred men that 
started with him, there remained only eight hundred and fifty! 
Hearing that Havelock had again retreated to Mangalwar on the 5th of August, the 
Revolutionaries once more captured Bashiratganj and encamped there. In this army of the 
Revolutionaries, the greater number were well-to-do Zemindars. “All the men killed yesterday were Zemindars.”3 For the sake of their country, for the sake of independence and 
Swaraj, those rich and happy men had discarded their soft beds and had resolved to go to the 
battle-field and risk all its dangers and risks. Seeing this enthusiasm on their part, the English 
3. Kaye and Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, p. 340. 
historian Innes says: “At least, the struggle of the Oudhians must be characterised as a war of 
independence.” The Revolutionary army was constantly hovering round Havelock’s 
Mangalwar, the Revolutionaries, as we said before, again encamped at Bashiratganj. Therefore, on the 11th of August, Havelock pushed forward to Bashiratganj for the third time 
– and for the third time there was a fight and the Revolutionaries fled away; but Havelock 
asked himself, for the third time, “Is this victory or defeat?” 
It was neither a victory nor a defeat. Therefore, instead of advancing, Havelock fell back on 
Mangalwar. In the meanwhile, Nana’s plans were becoming ripe. The Revolutionaries of 
Sagar and of Gwalior and bands of volunteers came and joined him. Taking them with him, 
Nana marched to Bithoor and threatened to attack Cawnpore. General Neill had not enough 
troops to march against him and so sent word to Havelock of his critical position. It was now impossible to think of proceeding to Lucknow. Therefore, on the 12th of August, Havelock 
267 
had to recross the Ganges and go back to Cawnpore! When the English bands sounded the 
retreat, everywhere there were joyful shouts of acclamation as if the victorious drums of 
independence was being beaten! You faithful Zemindars, you have served your country well 
in thus shedding your blood and driving away the foreign fow, and wanted to re-enter Oudh, 
away on the other side of the Ganges! Innes writes : “This retirement from Oudh produced a 
result which he had, doubtless, never contemplated. The Talukdars openly construed it as the 
British evacuation of the province and now formally recognised the Durbar at Lucknow as 
the de facto government; and, though they refrained from supporting it by their own presence 
they obeyed its orders which they had hitherto disregarded, and sent to the scene of warfare the contingents which they had been called upon to provide.”4 
The victory of the Revolutionaries was not a direct but an indirect one. If, in the above four or 
five skirmishes fought by Havelock, he had been defeated and driven away to Cawnpore, a 
greater self-confidence would have been seen in the Revolutionary ranks than was to be seen 
now by simply forcing him to retire by harassing his rear. And, proportionately, the English 
forces would have been more demoralised. The English army perceived that the retreat to 
Cawnpore was due not to lack of bravery but to lack of numbers and, though baulked of its 
4. The Sepoy Revolt, page 174. 
fruits, its vigour, self-confidence, and pride were not a whit diminished by this indirect 
defeat. And, therefore, Havelock encamped at Cawnpore with the full confidence that he 
would start again for Lucknow as soon as he got reinforcements. 
At this time, there was a serious quarrel between Havelock and Neill on account of personal 
jealousy. This is clearly seen in the following letter written by Havelock to Neill: “I wrote to 
you confidentially on the state of affairs. You send me back a letter of censure of my 
measures, reproof, and advice for the future. I do not want and will not receive any of them 
from an officer under my command, be his experience what it may. Understand this 
distinctly, and that a consideration of the obstruction that would arise to the public service at 
this moment along prevents me from taking the stronger step of keeping you under arrest. You now stand warned. Attempt no further dictation.”5 In this letter, one sentence is an 
excellent indication of the sense of duty towards the nation, ingrained in the bones of all 
268 
Englishmen. Even in the height of passion, Havelock says that “consideration of the 
obstruction that would arise to the public service alone” prevented him from then and there 
avenging his personal insult! In trhis dispute between the two generals Neill and Havelock at 
this critical time, not only did both of them behave calmly in order that their national enemy 
might not take advantage of this division, but both helped each other, as far as possible, for 
their common end. In that society where, individualism is held in check by regard for public 
advantage, in that society alone can wealth and intellect, and fame and independence last 
long. 
The first news that Havelock received when he came to Cawnpore was that Nana Sahib’s 
army had re-occupied the town of Brahmavarta. Seeing that the Revolutionaries had thus 
advanced again close to the Cawnpore army, Havelock marched against them at once. On this 
day, at the battle of Brahmavarta, when the English came up fighting within twenty yards of the Revolutionary ranks, the 42nd regiment on the Revolutionary side began to use their 
bayonets. The English so long used to think that, when all other means failed, bayonets would 
surely frighten away the Revolutionaries. But to-day, the brave heroes of freedom, 
themselves, began to attack with bayonets. At the same time, the Revolutionary cavalry fell 
5. Quoted by Malleson, Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, p. 337, note. 
upon the English rear and carried off their provisions. Thus the English army was attacked 
both in front and the rear by the gallant Revolutionaries. Even the English commander saw 
that the Revolutionaries were gradually becoming more and more valiant. But this bravery 
and heroism was not properly moulded by discipline as it was on the English side and, even 
after all this valour, the Revolutionaries were defeated and had to retire. When Havelock 
retired to Cawnpore on the 17th of August after inflicting this defeat on the Revolutionaries, 
he perceived that the whole army of Nana Sahib was not at Brahmavarta but that he had a 
vast and fully equipped force in the town of Kalpi, on the banks of the Jumna. Harassed from 
Kalpi, harassed from Brahmavarta, harassed from Oudh, harassed on both sides of the 
Ganges! Thus harassed on all sides, the “victorious” Havelock wrote to Calcutta: “We are in 
a terrible fix. If new reinforcements do not arrive, the British army cannot escape the fate of 
abandoning Lucknow and retreating to Allahabad.” Havelock awaited a reply to this appeal, 
from Calcutta. He expected to receive reinforcements according to his request and hoped that 
269 
he would crown all his victories and defeats by the relief of Lucknow. But, suddenly, he got 
an order that the command of the army to be sent to Lucknow was taken from him and given 
to Sir James Outram! English punishment is so severe! Even though victorious, Neill was a 
little late in going to Cawnpore; so, the command was taken from him and given to Havelock. 
And, though victorious, Havelock was inevitably late in going to Lucknow; so even an able 
general like him was removed and Sir James Outram was made the commander! At this 
news, Havelock was extremely mortified. The glory for which he strove day and night, with 
his life in his hands, the glory of relieving Lucknow, would now fall into other hands. This 
insult grieved him very much. Still, Malleson writes, “It is one of the glories of our 
countrymen that, however actually they may feel a disappointment of this nature, it never 
affects their public conduct. It is this recognition of, and this devotion to, duty, that stamp the 
Englishman. He subordinates to it all private feelings. He may be keenly sensible of the 
injustice perpetrated towards himself, but above himself is always his country. He may have 
his own views as to how that country may best be served; but, when the Government which 
represents it has otherand different views, he feels bound to devote all his energies to make 
possible the success of the orders of the Government. Thus acted Neill. And, now, thus also 
acted Havelock. Superseded, as he regarded himself to be, he was as active, as daring, as devoted, as when he ruled as the unfettered commander of an independent force.”6 
6. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. III, page 346. 
While Havelock was working day and night for the victory which was to belong to another, Sir James Outram arrived at Cawnpore on the 15th of September. After the chief command 
was transferred from Havelock to Sir James Outram, the first order that Outram issued was to 
the following effect: “He who so bravely has been keeping up the struggle for the raising of 
the siege of Lucknow, he alone deserves the honour of accomplishing that task. For this 
reason, I have handed over all my authority as a commander to the brave Havelock, till the 
siege of Lucknow be raised, and have enlisted myself as a simple volunteer in the ranks.” 
What a moral education this first noble order of the commander must have been to the 
English army! How the individual must have been merged in the nation! With the first order, 
Outram gave the chief command to Havelock and showed unparalleled patriotism, 
generosity, and unselfishness. 
270 Inspired by the moral lesson of this piece of heroic nobility, and reinforced by fresh English 
troops from Calcutta under officers like Eyre, Outram, and Cooper, the Cawnpore army, with redoubled vigour, again started to cross the Ganges on the 20th of September to march to the relief of Lucknow. The impatient Havelock of July 25th who started to “relieve Lucknow in five or six days,” the Havelock of August 12th unfortunate in having to retreat to Cawnpore 
and who found it difficult to hold out at all in Oudh, and the resolute and hopeful Havelock of 20th of September! How different are these three pictures of Havelock? He had, now, two 
thousand and five hundred English troops, and the whole army, including the Sikhs, 
numbered about three thousand two hundred and fifty. Select cavalry, excellent artillery, 
officers like Neill, Eyre, and Outram were with him. Now, he did not pay any heed to the 
Oudh Revolutionaries. Every Zemindar who cam,e to the field to save his country from the 
polluting touch of the Feringhi was killed. Every proud village that stood up to fight, unable 
to bear a sight of Feringhi horsemen galloping in the mother-country, was burnt to ashes! 
Every road, every field, every river on the way was reddened with Swadeshi blood! Thus, the 
powerful English army began to push its way into Oudh with violence. Fighting skirmish 
after skirmish and routing the ill-trained Revolutionaries, Havelock arrived at Alarm Bagh on the 23rd of September. A Revolutionary force was encamped there. The two forces met. The 
whole day the terrible battle was raging near Alam Bagh. The enemy captured five of the 
guns of the Revolutionaries, one of which the Revolutionaries recaptured. Both sides 
determined to spend the night on the field. But when the army of the enemy began to rest at 
night in the muddy and swampy ground, the Revolutionaries forswore all rest and started the 
fight again. That, night rain was falling in showers. But the waves of enthusiasm in the 
English army were stronger even than the showers of rain, for the electrifying news of the fall 
of Delhi had reached them that night! 
At last, the critical day of the 25th dawned. Seeing that Havelock’s army, avoiding the regular 
roads leading to Lucknow city was marching to the Residency by an odd road, the 
Revolutionaries opened a terrible fire. Bearing this artillery-fire bravely, the English came up 
from Alam Bagh right up to the bridge at Char Bagh. To cross this bridge was to enter 
Lucknow, and, therefore, an obstinate fight began on this most strategic point. Captain 
Maude directed a heavy fire for half an hour on that bridge, but neither the bridge was 
emptied nor were the guns on it silenced. Nay more, the English had lost already twenty-one 
killed near the Yellow House and more on the bridge. Was the whole English army to be 
checked by this one defiant bridge? So, Maude said to Havelock’s young son standing near 
by, “Young hero, find out some remedy for this!” At this, young Havelock came to Neill and 
271 
told him that the Revolutionaries could not be driven away by the artillery, and requested him 
to give the order to lead an assault on that bridge. But General Neill said that he could not 
give such an order without consulting Havelock. What was to be done next? Young Havelock 
at once found out the answer to this question. He spurred his horse and galloped a little in the 
direction where the general-in-chief, Havelock, was and, pretending to have seen him, 
returned to Neill. He humbly saluted Neill and said: “The commander-in-chief has ordered 
the assault on the bridge.” Hearing this, the general gave the order to assault. Young 
Havelock himself rushed to the bridge with the first batch of twenty-five Englishmen. The 
fire was terrible. In one or two minutes, which of the twenty-five remained alive? And the 
young Havelock himself – beware! beware – a brave and fearless hero has jumped upon the 
bridge and is taking aim straight at you! The brave Sepoy came up to within ten yards of 
young Havelock, stood there coolly before all the English host and quietly aimed at 
Havelock; the bullet went – but there was a difference of only half an inch! Instead of 
entering the head, it entered Havelock’s helmet. Still the dauntless Sepoy stood there calmly 
while several English guns were aimed at him and began loading his gun again! At last, you 
have been shot by Havelock, but bravo! You have died killing like a hero in this battle for 
independence! In a few moments, the vast English army rushed upon the bridge which began 
to shake with their weight. The Revolutionaries had to retire and the English advanced. The 
bridge fell; the first road to Lucknow fell; then, the second fell; then, the third – the English 
army pushed onward, victorious. Every few steps, swords would clash with swords and guns 
with guns. When a copious lake of blood accumulated there, the living Battle would advance 
again. In the evening, Outram said that the night should be spent outside. But no, no! How 
could the brave Havelock bear even to hear the name of rest? To whom countrymen of theirs, 
crushed in the very jaws of death in that Residency, one night would be like an age. 
Therefore, Havelock advanced – Neill advanced. The English army missed the road fixed 
upon and came nearer and nearer into the line of fire of the Revolutionaries – still Neill 
advanced. When he entered the great arch of Khas Bazaar, he saw that the English artillery 
had slacked a little behind. Therefore, he drew up his horse and turned his head to look back. 
Now is the time! This is the time for the country’s revenge! O you Revolutionary hero on the 
arch, even if you lose your life, you must make use of this opportunity. In a moment, a Sepoy 
who was lying in weit on the arch took aim and lodged a bullet straight into the very neck of 
General Neill and he dropped down dead! In the whole English army, it was very difficult to 
find another man so brave and so cruel, so insolent and so undaunted, so patient and so 
heartless, by the good luck and ill-luck of humanity. 
272 
But it is the peculiarity of the English army that the continuance of its work does not depend 
upon an individual – even an uncommon general like Neill. Neill’s death did not create the 
slightese confusion; the English army continued its march to the Residency all the same. In 
that Khas Bazaar where Neill fell with his neck broken, even if there had flowed an ocean of 
English blood, the English army would have marched in the same manner. When they went 
through the bazaars, they heard the joyous hurrahs from the Residency. They also shouted 
“Hurrah” in reply. Havelock had relieved his compatriots from the very jaws of Death! That 
scene can best be described in the pen of Captain Wilson who was present there. “In spite of 
deaths that were diminishing their ranks at every step, the white army approached the 
Residency, and at their sight all fear and doubt vanished away from the besieged garrison. 
They showered their congratulations and blessings on the advancing deliverers, the sick and 
the wounded crept out of the hsopitals, and continuous cheers and welcomes pealed forth in 
succession. Very soon the deliverers met the delivered. The occasion defies description. 
Those who had heard of the death of their husbands found themselves in the arms of their 
living husbands, to the unbounded joy of both. And those who were looking forward to the 
cherished embrace of their beloved ones learned for the first time that death had left no hope 
of seeing them any longer!” 
In the Residency of Lucknow, fighting without intermission for eighty-seven days, seven 
hundred men had fallen. About five hundred Europeans and four hundred Indians were alive, 
wounded as well as whole. And in the army of Havelock, which set out for their relief, seven 
hundred twenty-two men were killed before the Residency was reached! It was at the cost of 
so many brave men’s lives that the victory of Lucknow was achieved. 
But you cruel Despair! You are still as invincible as ever! Havelock has harassed the 
Revolutionaries so much but you still do not leave him! For, when he entered the Residency 
he had thought that, after all the victories, all the bloodshed, all the fighting, he had, at last, 
relieved the English power from the grip of the Revolutionaries. But now, his delusion is 
being dispelled and he asks himself, after reaching the Lucknow Residency, the same 
question as he did when he was on the banks of the Ganges, “What I brought to the 
Residency – is it complete relief or more help?” Instead of the siege being raised by 
Havelock’s coming to the Residency, the Revolutionaries now besieged the old army as well 
as the new! And therefore, everyone began to ask, “What has Havelock brought us, relief or 
mere help?” 
273 
It was only help! This army, which the two great English generals, Havelock and Outram, 
brought, after fighting many battles, to relieve the English at Lucknow from the grip of the 
Pandays, instead of raising the siege, went in and was besieged itself along with the other. 
The English hoped that the army of the Pandays would disperse as soon as Havelock’s army 
entered the Residency. All India soon saw that these hopes were completely dashed to the 
ground. Instead of giving up Lucknow or opening negotiations for peace with the English, the 
Panday host, infuriated by the progress of the War of Independence, took up its former 
position round the Residency as soon as Havelock entered it. While entering the Residency, 
one part of the English army had been left behind at Alam Bagh. This part was not allowed a 
chance to join the main army. And, before the pools of blood accumulated in the streets in the 
course of the day’s fight had dried up, the freedom-loving city of Lucknow, discardingthe 
discouragement and despair caused by their defeat and the victory of the English, again 
besieged and bottled up the English power in Oudh. 
It was not only the English army at Lucknow that was placed in a fix by this firm and 
determined stand of the Pandays in the War of Independence. The whole English army from 
Peshawar up to Aligarh had to suffer a severe strain. All the troops had been despatched 
under the command of Havelock to fall upon Lucknow; and when, in spite of the help of 
these troops, not only the besieged army in the Residency was not set free but the army was 
beleaguered there, then, the English power in the provinces below Lucknow became 
considerably enfeebles. Though just then, Delhi had fallen and the English army there was 
free, it had enough work on its hands in ‘restoring order’ in the provinces around Delhi. In 
these circumstances, the English Commander-in-Chief left the armies at Lucknow and Alam 
Bagh to fight it out themselves for the present with the Revolutionaries, and began to attend 
to the lightening of the strain on the British power as the more important task. 
The new English Commander-in-Chief, Sir Colin Campbell, had arrived at Calcutta on the 13th of August. From that day till the 27th of October, he has straining every nerve to prepare 
for the vast campaign to reconquer Hindusthan from the hands of the Revolutionaries. He 
portioned out the English army as it arrived from Madras, Ceylon, and China. He cast new 
guns in the Cassim Bazaar arsenal. He had excellent arrangements as far as possible for arms 
and ammunition, provision, cloths, and transport. He spent two months in these preparations 
for the next great campaign when the news arrived that Havelock and Outram were still shut 
up in the Residency at Lucknow. Therefore, with the resolve to deal personally with the 
274 
obstinate town of Lucknow which fell but rose again, he set out from Calcutta on the 27th of 
October. 
About the same time, a naval brigade had been formed under Colonel Powell and Captail 
William Peel and sent up the river to Allahabad. From Calcutta right up to Allahabad and 
Cawnpore, near all the big roads, small bands of Revolutionaries were constantly harassing 
the English army. If these bands had been found together, the English could have possibly 
attacked them all; but the Panday forces, trained in the school of Kumar Singh, hovered 
round the English army, always avoided battle, never gave the English any indication of their 
existence except when attacking them and, by these guerilla tactics, had created consternation 
in the English camp in the whole province. While trying to drive away such a band from the 
Kajva river, the colonel of the naval brigade was killed. On the day on which the Panday 
sword drank the blood of Powell, the Commander-in-Chief arrived at Cawnpore. The 
Commander-in-Chief had himself had a terrible experience as to how the Revolutionary 
bands harassed the armies on their march. 
Sir Colin Campbell was driving in a carriage from Allahabad to Cawnpore. Though the 
English had tremendous difficulties in obtaining transport and the Commander-in-Chief had 
to sit in a third-class cart, on the same road was marching a detachment of a Revolutionary 
regiment of infantry mounted on about a dozen elephants. There were, also, twenty-five 
horsemen accompanying them. Sir Colin was alone. When the driver of the card came near 
Sher Ghati, he saw the Revolutionary band coming to the same place by another road. 
Though the Pandays did not pay any attention to the freight on the card, because they had no 
idea of it, still, the freight itself was considerably anxious! The commander-in-chief going 
towards Cawnpore toconquer the whole of India saw standing before him, suddenly, the 
terrible Revolutionary band. He gave up the route and turned back immediately. A word 
would have done him! A sign from the cartman would have been enough! And the man who 
could not have been caught even after killing thousands of Englishmen would have been 
made a prisoner by an ordinary cartman. It was the difference of a moment. Sir Colin would 
have been arrested and taken before Kumar Singh or sent at once before the Angel of Death! 
After escaping from this danger, Sir Colin arrived at Cawnpore on the 3rd of November. As 
large a force as possible had already been assembled there under Brigadier Grant. The naval 
brigade mentioned before also arrived there along with the new English troops. Greathed 
also, with the Delhi army, came there having routed the Revolutionaries of the province of 
275 
Delhi on the way. After the fall of Delhi, the bravery which Greathed exhibited in restoring 
“peace” in the province around Delhi absolutely surpassed that of Neill at Allahabad. It is 
unparalleled. Since the beginning of the Revolution, up till November, this province was in 
the hands of the Revolutionaries. But the people in the province were so little harassed that 
the English themselves write: “The people not only cultivated but in many districts as 
extensively as ever. In fact, beyond supplying their necessity, the rebels did not venture to assume the character of tyrants of the country.”7 The Pandays had treated this province as 
was proper for volunteers fighting for the freedom of their country – and the British who had 
set out to crush its spirit of independence, destroyed it completely as befitted the proclaimers 
of slavery! And, all this, to restore peace! Burning village after village, hanging on the 
gallows any robust man found on the way, and killing the village inhabitants en route with 
more recklessness than if they were wild birds, Greathed’s army came from Delhi to 
Cawnpore! That army and the naval brigade effected a junction with the other white troops 
there, and Brigadier Grant began to go down the Ganges. O Ganges! How many English 
armies have come to thy shores to proceed to relieve Lucknow! And O you proud Ayodhya, 
are you not now at least going to release the English army from the dungeons of Lucknow 
when this new force has come to terrorise you? 
7. Narrative of the Indian Mutiny. 
Brigadier Grant had about five thousand English troops besides hundreds of camels, etc. He 
had also taken with him plenty of provisions for the Lucknow army. When the news came 
that this army of Grant had fought its way up to Alam Bagh, Sir Colin Campbell left 
Cawnpore and crossed the Ganges. To guard his rear, he left a select English and Sikh army 
with a number of guns at Cawnpore under the command of Wyndham who had won fame in several European wars. Sir Colin joined the chief army at Alam Bagh on the 9th of November. 
He reviewed the Alam Bagh forces and planned a combined attack by the various regiments. He now gave the order to make an assault on Lucknow on the 14th of November. Before this, 
a daring Englishman, called Cavenagh, had entered the Residency in company with an Indian 
at night, evading the sepoy guards by blackening his face and putting on Indian garb. He was 
sent there to get information about the state of defences of the Residency and to discuss plans 
about the coming attack. He had before this time delivered the messages of Colin and Outram 
to each other. In the Residency and in the English camp at Alam Bagh, everyone was waiting 
276 
anxiously for the 14th of November, Havelock and Outram were to come out of the Residency 
to attack the Revolutionaries from inside and Sir Colin was to press them on the other side! 
At this time, in the English camp were to be found most of the eminent generals and warriors 
that made their name in 1857. Havelock, Outram, Peel (of the naval brigade), Greathed, 
Hodson of Delhi, Brigadier Hope Grant, Eyre, and the Commander-in-Chief Sir Colin 
himself – all were there. There were fresh Highlanders, Outram’s Europeans anxious to jump 
into the field from within the besieged fort, “loyal” Panjabee youths, and still more loyal 
Sikhs, with their swords still bespattered with the blood of the Motherland shed at Delhi! 
Such was the English army that started towards Lucknow on the 14th of November. The 
whole day was spent in skirmishes between the English and the Revolutionaries. About the 
evening, the English army had advanced fighting upto Dilkhwush Bagh. Sir Colin decided to 
spend the night there and encamped in the garden. Though the Revolutionaries led 
intermittend attacked even that night, the English army did not heed them and spent the night 
there. Next morning, Sir Colin arrayed all his troops and gave the order to attack Lucknow again on the 16th. Then, the English army advanced like a tidal wave and fell upon Sikandar 
Bagh. Till it reached this place, it had not met with serious resistance from the 
Revolutionaries. But whoever was the leader of the Revolutionaries there, he did show some 
splendid fighting. When the Highlanders, under Ewart, and the Sikhs, under Powell, fell upon 
Sikandar Bagh yelling fiercely, it seemed as if the undaunted dash of the English force would 
sweep everything before it. The Sikh Subahdar, Gukul Singh, waved his sword in the air and 
tried his utmost not to let the Highlanders go before his own fellows. On! Unfortunate 
Lucknow! With the cruel emulation as to who will drink her blood most, Sikh and Highlander 
swords began grim work. But the strong boulders of Sikandar Bagh were destroyed, the 
heroes there would not move back at all! For, when some stones of the wall fell, the English 
troops rushed there like arrows. Who goes first, Sikh or Highlander? Both are trying hard. 
But, at last, the man who first reached the breach is a Sikh. To reward this traitor’s valour, a 
bullet right in his breast! He fell and immediately Cooper rushed in, and behind him Eward 
and captain John Lumsden, - and then Sikhs and Highlanders all quickly rushed in. The 
Sepoys within were staggered for a moment on seeing the whole army entering so quickly. 
But the hero who led the Revolutionaries that day at Sikandar Bagh was no ordinary leader. 
He does not think of retreat! 
Victory or Death! Death or Victory!! This cry fits only the months of those who fight for 
freedom. Cooper is the first man who had rushed into the Bagh; therefore, the Sepoy must try 
277 
to kill him first. This cannot be done except by the brave sepoy officer of the regiment which 
revolved at Ludhiana. He looked out for Cooper and ran straight at him. Clang! Clang! Clang 
of swords! A deep thrust, both simultaneously cut each other and both fell dead! Lumsden 
began to wave about his sword in the air and shouted, “Come on, men, for the honour of 
Scotland!” How insolent! For the honour of Scotland! And has Hindusthan no honour? 
Before any white man came up for the honour of Scotland, a brown hero rushed forth for the 
honour of Hindusthan – and blood began to gush out of Lumsden’s lifeless corpse! While 
such a terrible hand to hand fight was going on here, the English army broke the wall on 
another side and rushed in from there also. Now this Bagh had no hope of victory. Then, O 
Sikandar Bagh, are you going to fight even after victory is gone? Fight on, fight on! Let 
victory go but do not lose honour, do not lose fame, jump into thebattle as a duty! On every 
door, on every step, in every quadrangle, sword clashed with sword! Blood was shed 
everywhere. Malleson says, “The fight for the possession of the enclosure was bloody and 
desperate, the rebels fighting with all the energy of despair. Nor did the struggle end when 
our men forced their way inside. Every room, every staircase, every corner of the towers was 
contested. Quarter was neither given nor asked for; and, when at last the assailands were 
masters of the place more than two thousand rebel corpses lay heaped around them. It is said 
that, of all who garrisoned it, only four men escaped, but even the escape of four is 
doubtful.”8 
8. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 132. 
Oh, you two thousand martyrs that denied fighting for independence in Sikandar Bagh, let 
this grateful history be dedicated to your memory! The blood of two thousand patriots! This 
history is dedicted to that blood! Who were you that started to fight thus for the country? 
What were your names? Who was the brave leader that led you to the fatal battle? The good 
fortune of relating all this, the good fortune of pronouncing the names of you who sacrificed 
your bodies in the hope of serving humanity, has not fallen to our lot! Let, then, this history 
be dedicated to your nameless memory alone! Victory was gone, but you did not allow your 
fame to be tarnished! Let your blood and bravery purify and adorn the Past and incite and 
inspire the Future! 
You did not soil your fames, O Heros of Independence, but if your self-sacrifice in Sikandar 
Bagh had begun at its proper time, victory also would have been yours! Now, the might of 
your enemy has increased manifold. Thousands of new soldiers have come to fight on their 
278 
side, their strain has become less after the fall of Delhi, their moral strength has augmented 
by victory and yours has diminished by defeat. Such a dry and lifeless soil, even the blood of 
two thousand men will not fertilise. If, however, as soon as the Revolution began, at the first 
onslaught on the feeble Residency, you had rushed up with the cry of “Victory or Death!” – 
then, in half an hour’s time, the crown of independence would have shone on the forehead of 
Hindusthan. You died as you should die but the auspicious moment was gone! Time and 
opportunity were gone. In a war of Revolution, what is lost by a minute, sometimes, cannot 
be regained in an epoch. A drop of blood could have given you victory then, but, now, even 
fountains of blood will given you only fame, but victory is difficult. In the whirlwind of 
Revolutions, the loss of a single moment spoils the whole plan. One step back means disaster. 
The momentary hankering after life is sure to bring permanent death to the cause! 
Blood was abundantly shed in other places also than in Sikandar Bagh. Bilkhwush, Alam 
Bagh, and Shah Najaf were giving a terrible battle to the enemy that day and that night. In the 
early morning, all the bells of Lucknow city began to peal, drums began to beat, and again the 
wounded city began to give a fierce battle to the enemy. The fight at Moti Mahal to-day is not 
a whit less fierce than that at Shah Najaf yesterday. But, in the end, the English got decided 
the upper hand and the English army was enabled to relieve its compatriots so long shut up in the Residency. On the 17th, 18th, 19th, right up to the 23rd, the battle raged at Lucknow and, at 
last, the besieged army and the relieving army met each other. The Residency, over which so 
long hung the shadow of death, now assumed a pleasant smile. But, even now, the 
Revolutionaries did not heed the English victory. Though the two armies had united and the 
whole city of Lucknow was swimming in a sea of blood, they would talk neither of surrender 
nor of retreat! On account of this obstinate courage on their part, it was always uncertain 
when the fighting would be over. So, Sir Colin began again to reform the British army. He 
evacuated the Residency and collected all the troops in Dilkhwush Bagh. He kept four 
thousand men and twenty-five guns in Alam Bagh under the command of Outram. He made 
all arrangements necessary for the future struggle. And for the victory that had been gained, 
he very properly praised the army for its bravery, discipline, and obedience. Of this praise, 
the greatest portion was deservedly given to Havelock. 
But while the English army was rightly exulting over its victory, Havelock who had the chief 
share in it suddenly died!! By the exertions of the terrible battle-field of Lucknow, by care 
and despair, the brave Havelock had been sinking slowly. And he succumbed at the very moment of victory. This death poisoned the joy of the English on the 24th. However, it was 
279 
not the time for brooding in sorrow over the dead, but for carrying out their uncompleted 
task. If Havelock fell while taking Lucknow, to take Lucknow was the best way to remember 
and do honour to his memory. 
But before starting to conquer Lucknow, why these sudden shocks of artillery near 
Cawnpore? Oh, they might be nothing! So long as the brave Wyndham, with fame in 
European wars, is there, the noise need not materially disturb Sir Colin. Who is the 
Revolutionary that would dare to face an English warrior like Wyndham? 
But these messengers say that Tatia Tope is also there! Tatia Tope at Cawnpore! Sir Colin at 
once understood the meaning of the news of the cannonade he had heard; he sent Outram 
with the greatest haste against Lucknow and marched at once towards Cawnpore to see that 
TatiaTope was doing there! 
CHAPTER-VI TATIA TOPE 
WHEN the army of the “mutineers” had been defeated at Cawnpore on the 16th of July, Srimant Nana left Cawnpore and proceeded to Brahmavarta. That night – the 16th of July – 
was spent by Nana in his palace there, in deliberation as to his future plans; and the very next 
morning saw Nana Sahib approaching the boats waiting on the river Ganges with his 
youngest brother Bala Sahib, his nephew Rao Sahib, his aide-de-camp Tatia Tope, with all 
the ladies belonging to the royal household, and with his treasure and a few supplies. Nana 
was going to Fatehpur in the Lucknow province. Choudhuri Bhopal Singh, an intimate friend 
of Nana Sahib, received them there very cordially and entertained them in his house. While 
280 Havelock with all his army was besieging Cawnpore and was thinking of pressing on to 
Lucknow, Nana also was deliberating in full Durbar as to the best means of opposing 
Havelock. 
To find a satisfactory solution to this problem, one person in this Dsurbar was eminently 
fitted by his extraordinary intellect. His subtle intellect seemed to be ever on the look-out for 
difficult problems which awaited solution. So far, Tatia Tope had done nothing higher than 
the work of a clerk; but then, there was nothing beyond the work of a clerk, so far, to be done 
at Nana’s Durbar. But one glimpse of the spirit of liberty – and the Durbar of Nana, too, 
showed the characteristic intelligence, alertness, and brilliance of the old Raigarh Durbar. 
New aspirations were now struggling for fulfilment, fresh thrones had to be established, new 
armies had to be formed, fresh battlefields had to be fought and won. Now, the joy of victory 
had gladdened the Durbar but, then, the grief consequent on defeat produced a reaction. But, 
in close successioncomes a profound calm; for, vengeance for past insults is being planned; 
and this calm is being disturbed alone by the still and silent deliberations in the Durbar as to 
the future plan of the Revolutionary party. It was but natural that the ability, so long latent for 
lack of scope, should now step forward boldly, that clever schemes, so long only suggested to 
the mind, should now be readily formulated for action. And it must be admitted that for 
clever, deep-laid, successful scheming, an equal to Tatia Tope would be hard, indeed, to find. 
Tatia’s idea was to reorganise the bands disorganised on account of the defeat at Cawnpore. 
The splendid logic, the intimate acquaintance with the most secret springs of human nature, 
and the undaunted daring of this extraordinary man were so superb that whole regiments of 
rude Sepoys would be ready to rise in his favour with one mind in the course of a single day. 
When the necessity for reinforcements arose, Tatia had gone straight to Sheorajpur and enlisted the 42nd regiment – lately risen – for the new cause. Meanwhile, Havelock had been 
preparing to cross the Ganges and advance on Lucknow; so, Tatia decided to harass his rear. 
How the English commander was, thus, dragged back to Cawnpore, how on his return he 
saw, to his surprise, the extreaordinary Mahratta ruling in his palace at Brahmavarta, how the 
English army was forced to give battle at this place, and how, in the encounter, the army of the Revolutionaries was defeated on the 16th of August – all this has been described in a 
previous chapter. After the defeat, Tatia swam the Ganges with his whole army and joined 
Nana at Fatehpur. Reinforcements were again necessary. The same problem rose again. But 
why need Nana worry about reinforcements so long at Tatia Tope was there? The army in the 
cantonments of Gwalior – anxious to meet the Feringhi in battle – had so far been obliged to 
281 
keep quiet, because of the ‘loyalty’ of the Scindia. To Gwalior, then some- one must be sent – 
and who fitter than the wily Mahratta who, like the magician who waves a spell round his 
audience, had seduced and kept within the hollow of his hand whole regiments of Sepoys? 
Tatia, then, went to Gwalior incognito. And shortly after, he had seduced the whole army – 
infantry, cavalry, artillery and all – at Morar, and had even brought them as far as Kalpi. 
From a military point of view, Kalpi would have been of great help to the Revolutionaries. As 
the river Jumna flowed between Halpi and Cawnpore, it could serve as a cover against the 
English army. Tatia realised, then, that after Cawnpore no better base could be secured than 
the fort of Kalpi and so he took the fort. When Nana heard that he had got a good army and 
the fort of Kalpi, he consented to make Kalpi his base and sent Shrimant Bala Sahib, as his 
representative, to occupy the fort and look after it. While Bala Sahib was holding the fort, 
Tatia began to think of attacking the English army. 
At this time, General Wyndham who had earned fame in the bettle-fields of Europe was the 
chief commander of the Cawnpore regiments. Sir Colin had gone towards Lucknow leaving 
this small army to protect Cawnpore. Tatia, then, had got his opportunity. The 
Resolutionaries of Lucknow were engaging the huge army of Sir Colin and keeping it budy; 
it would be difficult for general Wyndham to get help from outside; and hence, this was the 
time to surprise him, engage him, and, if possible, to get rid of him. Such was the plan of 
Tatia. Bala Sahib thought well of this plan and Tatia himself was made commander of the 
forces. A mere clerk yesterday, this poor Brahmin of the Durbar of Nana was the commander 
of to-day. He crossed the Jumna and engaged openly in battle with General Wyndham who 
had spent a lifetime on the battlefields of Europe! And with what means? With the 
recentlyrisen unorganised Sepoy mass and with the peasant rabble who had accompanied 
them! He stood face to face with the English army which had all the advantages that 
organisation, military training, and discipline could give. It was instructive to watch such an 
encounter, to see how the spirit of independence could meet all the overwhelming advantages 
on the opposite side. It was a living example and lesson showing to what extent an army 
without the advantages of discipline but with the spirit of liberty could fight, illustrating with 
what success it might have fought had it all the advantages of discipline. With the troops of Gwalior which had joined him, Tatia had reached Kalpi on the 9th of November. Kalpi is 
situated about forty-six miles from Cawnpore. Having accurately ascertained the exact 
whereabouts of the English army, he left Kalpi, crossed the Jumna, entered the Doab, and, 
leaving all his treasure and other things at Jalna, occupied some villages adjoining Cawnpore. 
He was playing a deep game in not rushing on to Cawnpore immediately after crossing the 
282 
Jumna. He did not want to annoy Wyndham until news came that Sir Colin had begun to 
engage in the fight at Lucknow. When that news did reach him, he advanced on Sheorajpur, occupying important positions on the way. About the 19th of November, Tatia, by these 
clever tactics, was able to cut off all supplies from the British army. Meanwhile, the famous 
commander of the English forces was certainly not idle at Cawnpore. The stream of the 
English army flowing from Calcutta was stopped at Cawnpore, and Carthew was sent with a 
division to establish himself on the road to Kalpi. Wyndham coolly awaited Tatia’s 
movements. Would Tatia go on to Ayodhya to cut off the rear of Sir Colin’s battalions or 
would he attack him in Cawnpore itself? 
But Wyndham was not a commander who would wait for ever. His daring nature ever pressed 
him forward. Moreover, he thoroughly believed in the superstition that English troops were 
superior not only to Indian troops but all Asiatic troops in general and that the best means of 
defeating Asiatics was to attack them boldly on the front with one heavy charge. “Strong 
though you may be, the least hesitation on your part to attack,. The least delay, and the 
Asiatic becomes proud and conscious of power, and becomes aggressive. Thus, even if you 
are weak, hesitate not, but charge boldly with one united charge, and the Asiatics would be 
bewildered and fly before you through mere fright.” Such was the thorough belief of the 
English and, out of the many occasions on which they had acted on this belief, they had been 
successful on most. It was considered, therefore, quite a rule well-established by experiment, 
that it was not proportion of numbers but bluff and bullying that was the sure road to victory; 
hence, the advisability of a handful of European troops charging a large mass of Asiatics 
straight likle an arrow! Every English soldier coming out to India was made to learn this rule 
by heart and every English historian who wrote a book brought this fact prominently before 
all. General Wyndham, trained as he was in such warfare and with such ideas, was not likely 
to allow Tatia to make his movements unhampered. He left Cawnpore immediately and 
moved towards the bridge over the canal near Kalpi. 
Tatia, meanwhile, moved from Srikhandi to the river Pandu on the 25th November. When the 
daring enemy approached so near, the English army prepared for battle and the thoroughly- tried antidote against Asiatic courage just referred to was used on the 26th. On that date, 
Wyndham started his straight-as-an-arrow attack. The Revolutionaries were ambushed in a 
thick jungle and they began their cannonade on the English army. After a good deal of 
exchange of shots, the Engliosh took three of the guns of Tatia and Wyndham almost 
believed that, once again, owing to his bold charge, his army was successful. His army, too 
283 
felt the assurance of victory. But it was a vain hope. For, soon the English troops were forced 
to retire steadily. In an instant, the hope of victory was changed into certain defeat and Tatia 
pursued him until he had retreated up to Cawnpore. The Revolutionary cavalry at their back 
would neither attack them nor leave them! They wheeled round and round the enemy, forced 
the enemy back, and themselves reached the gates of Cawnpore. Instead of taking fright at 
the charge of Wyndham, Tatia himself began the aggressive, meeting charge with charge. 
Says Malleson : “The leader of the rebel army was no fool. The blow dealt by Wyndham, far 
from frightening him, had disclosed to his mind the weakness of the British leader..... Tatia 
Toperead, then, the necessities of Wyndham’s position as he would have read an open book 
and, with the instincts of a real general, he resolved to take advantage of them.”1 
Tatia ordered his army which had fought Wsyndham for twenty-four hours without a 
minute’s rest that they were to be ready by the morning to march against the enemy. But they 
were not to start the attack until another contingent of the Revolutionaries coming from 
Shewoli and Sheorajpur opened fire on the right flank of the English army. As soon as that 
began, however, they were to begin the attack in right earnest. Wyndham meanwhile had led 
1. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 167. 
forth his army ready for battle; but when, even after nine, the army of the Revolutionaries did 
not begin the attack and not a sign of them was visible, the English army returned to camp for 
breakfast. At eleven, the army was made ready for battle. A vague uncertainty as to the real 
intention of Tatia pervaded the atmosphere. 
This was soon made known, however, in a terrible manner; for, cannon-balls were sent flying 
from the Revolutionary guns against the right wing of the English. The vanguard, too, was 
attacked by Tatia. Directly after this, Wyndham sent Carthew with six guns to the road to 
Brahmavarta to protect that part of Cawnpore. And now a regular cannonade began. Soon it 
appeared that the English artillery-men were falling back. Tatia had arranged his army in a 
semicircle and his game was to close on the enemy from the front and the flanks. Wyndham 
tried his best to break through the circle but the guns of Tatia would not allow him to advance 
284 
even a step. It seemed they could not even maintain their position, and the English, within a 
short time, began to show signs of retiring. Seeing that the left wing had retired leaving their 
guns behind the right wing held on for a time and tried to keep the guns. But they could not 
hold much longer. As they too retreated, the semicircle of the Revolutionaries closed on them 
more tightly. By six in the evening, the English army was thoroughly demoralised. A short 
while more and the rout was complete. Thousands of tents and oxen, a great quantity of 
provisions and clothing fell into the hands of the Revolutionaries. Half of Cawnpore was now 
in the hands of Tatia. Thus, the second crown of victory crowned this brave and stalwart 
Mahratta. Yesterday’s battle gave him a victory which was but indirect and partial, but to- 
day’s victory was complete and direct. For he had not merely defeated the clever and famous 
commander of the English in a battle which lasted a whole day, but he had routed the English 
army thoroughly; he had captured the whole camp, tents and all; he had driven them out of a 
portion of Cawnpore and himself retaken the city. Even English historians admit that, if his 
army had been as disciplined as he was capable, he would have been able to destroy 
Wyndham’s army completely. 
And now the cannonade of Tatia had reached Sir Colin’s ears. When Tatia came to 
Cawnpore, he believed as certain that Sir Colin would be engaged at Lucknow at least for a 
month. But soon, Tatia heard that, in some unforeseen way, the Revolutionaries had been got 
rid of by Sir Colin, and it seemed now pretty certain that Sir Colin would attack him, and try 
to close him in by attacking him from both the sides of the Ganges. Tatia’s face clouded with 
anxiety at this news. Wyndham felt very hopeful. That, very night, Wyndham resolved to win 
back the glory he had lost during the day. But his men were all tired and therefore, giving up 
the idea of the night attack, he began to prepare for giving another battle the next morning. 
He tried to repair the mistakes of the previous day and determined on an attack. The fight 
began early in the morning. The Revolutionaries aimed their artillery on both flanks of the 
enemy. The fight went on as on the previous day till midday. But this day, the English did not 
retire. They assumed the aggressive and began a determined, united, formidable and, as they 
thought, irresistible, charge. 
Irresistible indeed! The right wing is absolutely shattered! Brigadier Wilson is down! Captain 
M’Crea is no more! Morphy, Major Stirling, Lieutenant Gibbins, all are down! Aye, Asiatics 
can produce a Tatia, after all! The third day, then, saw a victory for Tatia and his followers, 
for they fought hotly and well till late in the evening and they had routed what remained the 
English army. The English army was more completely routed than even on the day before, 
285 
both the wings having been actually driven from the field on this last day. And Tatia had now 
captured the whole of Cawnpore and thus the third crown was shining on the sword of the 
brave Mahratta.2 
Just when the English army was being routed, the commaner-in-chief, Sir Colin, arrived in 
their camp. He realisedd the extent of the injury done to British prestige by Tatia; he saw, 
with his own eyes, the English troops flying for their very life and the victorious troops of the 
Revolutionaries persuing them; and he heard, with his own ears, the trumpets and drums 
proclaiming the victory of the Revolutionaries! He saw the importance of the struggle Tatia 
was carrying on at Cawnpore. 
2. The following graphic picture is given of the defeat by an English officer : “You 
will read the account of this day’s fighting with astonishment; for it tells how English troops, 
with their trophies and their mottoes and their far-framed bravery, were repulsed, and they 
lost their camp, their baggage and position to the scouted and despised natives of India! The 
beaten Feringhis, as the enemy has now a right to call them, have retreated to their 
entrenchments amidst overturned tents, pillaged baggage, men’s kits, fleeting camels, 
elephants and horses, and servants. All this is most melancholy and disgraceful.” – Charles 
Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 190. 
Tatia on his part realised that Sir Colin was enabled to march back to Cawnpore, just at this 
juncture, to the help of the English army, only through the utter failure of the Revolutionary 
party to hold their own at Lucknow. But he did not get disheartened. He smashed the bridge 
near Ayodhya to render it impossible for the English army to cross the Ganges; he also 
stationed guns near the place. But the enemy understood his game and, in the face of the fire, crossed from Ayodhya to Cawnpore before the 30th of November. In the camp of Tatia, Nana 
Sahib and Kumar Singh had also arrived. These leaders dedtermined that, instead of leaving 
Cawnpore, it would on the whole be more creditable to meet the commander-in-chief in 
battle, especially as “they had, as their leader, a man of very great natural ability!”3 
Tatia stationed his left wing in a well-protected position between Cawnpore and the Ganges. 
His centre was right in Cawnpore city. And his right extended behind the Ganges canal and 
held a bridge over it. In his army, there were ten thousand trained sepoys. With these he kept 
286 
Sir Colin busy on the 2nd, he actually opened fire on Sir Colin’s tent. On the 6th, Sir Colin was 
forced to accept the open challenge of the Revolutionaries. Consolidating, therefore, his army 
of seven thousand in an admirable manner, he began his attack on these insolent “mutineers” 
who could dare to attack the camp on the commander-in-chief himself. Seeing the right wing 
of the Revolutionaries unprotected, Sir Colin determined to charge on the right. 
But in order to draw off their attention from the right and direct it towards the wrong direction, the English opened fire early in the morning of the 6th on the left wing of the 
enemy, who were soon engaged in repelling the attack. A mock charge was meanwhile made 
on the centre, too, by Greathed. So believing that the enemy’s objective was the left and the 
centre, the Revolutionaries began to concentrate their strength on these. While the left was 
seriously suffering from the artillery of the British, the English began suddenly to return to 
the right of the Revolutionary army. But the Gwalior contingent stationed on the right by 
Tatia began a furious cannonade on the Sikhs and the English who were charging. The rifles 
of the Panday army, too, were very active. But the Sikhs made, “double march”, and rushed 
forward, being backed up by Peel’s white troops, and the Gwalior army, under this double 
fire, showed signs of retiring. As soon as that was apparent, the fire of the enemy was 
reduced and soon the Gwalior army was scattered completely. All their guns were captured 
3. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.IV, page 186. 
and a furious pursuit of them began on the Kalpi road. A complete victory was thus obtained 
by Sir Colin so far as the right wing was concerned; but, he was not satisfied with that. He 
had an idea of blocking completely the road to brahmavarta on the left, as he had blocked the 
road to Kalpi on the right, and thus, of capturing Tatia with his whole army. So he despatched 
Mansfield to the road leading to Brahmavarta. On this day, the well-established proposition 
about Asiatics, referred to above, seemed to have been confirmed both positively and 
negatively. The feigned attack on the left made by Greathed was so weak that, had the 
Pandays made but one attempt to repel it, not only would Greathed have been punished in a 
way he would have remembered to the end of his life, but the very fortunes of the day would 
have been changed. As it was, the Revolutionaries began to give way under the straight attack 
of the English. While this affirmative part of the proposition, viz., that, at a good charge and 
at a show of audacity, the Asiatics lose heart, was being confirmed on the centre 
emphatically; on the left, the negative part too was being realised in an unmistakably clear 
287 
way. For when the Revolutionaries saw Mansfield coming, crouching a roundabout and 
concealed manner, they attacked him even though he had a large division. Nana himself 
commanded the left. He took full advantage of the slow movements of Mansfield. When Sir 
Colin was inquiring whether Tatia had been hemmed in or not, he heard with regret that 
through the dilatory movements of Mansfield, he had been foiled in his desire. He did not 
succeed in capturing Tatia Tope! 
For, that Mahratta general had pressed Mansfield and pressed him as far as Brahmavarta. He 
had broken through the network of the English army, and had gone off with his army and 
with all his guns. How many more networks the English general would have to spread before 
they could succeed in capturing the Mahratta tiger will appear in a future chapter. 
Though Tatia was able to escape, on this day, with all his men and all his guns, Hope Grant was pursuing him closely and, on the 9th of December, a running fight ensured between Tatia 
and the English near Sheorajpur; and, though Tatia did break through this time too, most of his gung fell into the hands of the enemy. Thus, in an intervcal of two days between the 6th and the 9th, Sir Colin was able to repair the defeat of Wyndham, to capture thirty-two of the 
Revolutionary guns, and to break up their army, forcing some towards Kalpi and the rest on 
to Ayodhya. After obtaining these big victories, he thought that minor victories were surely 
within reach. So, he marched on to Brahmavarta, looted the property there, razed the palace 
to the ground, and, to crown all his triumph, demolished the sacred temples of that city. 
It was in this palace that the brightest gems of India, Nana and Tatia, Bala and Rao, and the 
“Chhabeli” of Jhansi had been bred and brought up. It was this palace that first conceived the 
Warf of Independence of that glorious year. The temples of that city had blessed the birth of 
the ideal. When the throne of Raigarh which had been snatched from the Mahrattas had been 
re-established again in this palace washed by a free flow of the stream of English blood, the 
palace and these temples had been illuminated. 
That very fire which could produce all the illuminations had been instrumental in reducing 
them to-day to ashes. But history need not drop a tear on these scared ashes. For this palace 
and these temples had been burnt down only after they had accomplished their task. The very 
extinction of such structures is more inspiring, a thousand times more life-giving, than the 
existence of hundreds of other structures which are but monuments of slavery; for these have 
attempted to give birth to independence; and they have died in that attempt. Far more 
288 
profitable is death through the attempt to establish Swaraj than life in slavery. The sacred fuel 
burning in the sactificial fire is a thousand times more life-giving than the log of wood 
burning in the funeral pyre. 
CHAPTER-VII THE FALL OF LUCKNOW 
AFTER thus stemming the fierce tide of Tatia’s progress at Cawnpore, Sir Colin started 
reconquering the other portions of the country that had risen. Seaton had been marching 
slowly, ‘paficying’ provionces on the way, and had now come down to Aligarh. So now 
Walpole was sent by Kalpi road to accomplish the same task for all the territory from Aligarh 
to Cawnpore. Walpole was to march upwards from Cawnpore and Seaton was to go 
downwards from Aligarh; they were to meet at Minpuri; and, thus, all the tract of the Doab 
along the Jumna was to be reconquered. While this was being done, Sir Colin was to march 
towards Fatehgarh from Cawnpore. Such was the plan of operations. It was thought that the 
289 
Doab Revolutionaries would be pressed back by the English army and would eventually enter 
Fatehgrah. And hence it was decided that the closing finale of the operations should be 
conducted and a great battle should be fought near Fatehgarh, where the three armies of 
Walpole, Seaton, and Campbell were to meet after the close of their individual operations. 
According to this plan, on the 18th of December, Walpole, with all his guns and his army, 
began his upward march from Cawnpore on the Kalpi road. After fighting one or two 
skirmishes with scattered Revolutionary bands all along the way, wreaking cruel vengeance – 
the well-known and customary Feringhi vengeance – on all persons indiscriminately, 
innocent people as well as those who actually fought against England, and on the villages 
which had sheltered the Pandays; and, by such means, trying to bring back the territory under 
British allegiance, this Walpole came as far as Itawa and, of course, he would have gone 
further. But, though the Revolutionaries in Itawa had all left, he had still to stop, with all his 
army, in that city. What could be the reason of this extraordinary necessity? What could stop 
this march of the English army? Was it that Revolutionary troops, in large numbers, had 
attacked him? Or could it be infantry or the cavalry? Or was it by any chance the artillery 
with the fierce fire playing all round? 
No, none of these things were happening in Itawa. Neither the infantry nor the cavalry, nor 
the fire of the artillery was stopping the English at Itawa. Only twenty or twenty-five Indian 
heroes are making a stand from youder building. That building has a roof and its walls have 
holes made in them for fixing the muskets. It is these twenty-five men, standing with a 
musket in their hand and a burning fire in their heart, that have made the fully-equipped 
English stop at the door of Itawa. Itawa blocked the passage of the English army 
notwithstanding the guns and cannon that it carried, because Itawa had not yet received its 
usual toll due to it as of right. That toll was that everyone who dared enter the threshold of 
Itawa against its wishes should fight first. The challenge was “Fight first!” These twenty-five 
men had determined to sell their lives dear, though escape was easy. What battle could be 
given to these handful of people in this building? If probably they waited for a few minutes, 
these mad people would come to their senses and make their escape, which was yet open to 
them – so thought the English. But though they waited long, there seemed no possible chance 
of the “mutineers” coming to their senses. So, an engagement was at last decided upon. The 
mere show of the artillery would, it was thought, be sufficient to make them fly. The English, 
therefore, exhibited their artillery and tried to frighten the Revolutionaries. 
290 But, fear could exist only in the hearts of ordinary mortals. Those who, charmed by the ideal 
of independence, welcomed death as the only means of achieving the ideal – who could 
succeed in frightening these? Who fights for victory fears; who bittles for glory, even, may 
fear; but who could frighten him who fights for death alone? The utmost one can be afraid of 
is death! But he who has overstepped those limits and who smiles on death, what could 
frighten him? What could come in the way of such a man? Not all the thunders and all the 
lightnings of dread heaven could stop his progress; for his progress is towards death and 
those elements are only rendering his task easier. He who hopes for death alone has no room 
for despair. These national heroes of Itawa who courted death in battle with the ardour of a 
lover for his love, what could frighten them, then? 
And so they willingly relinquished all the ways and means of escape they had. They had not 
the slightest hope of victory and yet they defied the English army and loudly called on them 
to join battle. That army of the English which did not stop for the ramparts of Delhi nor for 
the walls of Cawnpore nor for the siege of Lucknow, now had to stop before this 
insignificant-looking building! 
Malleson says: “Few in number, armed only with muskets, they were animated by a spirit 
fiercer even than the spirit of despair – by a determination to die martyrs to their cause. 
Walpole reconnoitred the place. It was, for a place to stop an army, insignificant. It would 
easily be stormed. Yet to storm it in the face of its occupants would cost valuable life and it 
seemed that easier and less costly means were available. These easy means were at first tried. 
Hand-grenades were thrown in; an attempt was made to smoke out the occupants with 
burning straw. But all in vain. Through their loop-holes, the rebels poured in a constant and 
effective fire on the assailants and, for three hours, kept them at bay. At last, it was resolved 
to blow up that place. For this purpose, Bourchier, aided by Scatchley of the Engineers, made 
a mine with a number of his gun cartridges. The explosion of this conferred upon the 
defenders the martyr’s honours they coveted. It buried them in the ruins.” 
The dynamite exploded the building. The highly coveted honour of martyrdom was, thus, 
gained by these heroes who longed fot it. They died on the spot and were buried in the ruins. 
And this sacred mausoleum of Itawa, since that day, has been preaching a silent and terrible 
sermon, by day and by night, on How to die in defence of a Noble cause!! 
291 
Brave Itawa! Glorious for ever! What better, what holier inspiration could one find in the 
pass of Thermopylae, the ramparts of Breccia, or the stand of De Reuter in the Netherlands! 
All glory to Itawa! Itawa for ever! 
When Walpole reached Itawa, Seaton too had passed Aligarh, Kashgunj, and Minpuri, and 
was engaging in small skirmishes the Revolutionary bands. The two armies met at Minpuri on the 8th of January, 1858. In accordance with their previous plans, the banks of the Jumna, 
near the Doab, had been reconquered by the British army from Delhi and Meerut as far as 
Allahabad. Meanwhile, Sir Colin had been marching along the Ganges. He had crushed the 
Nawab of Fatehgarh and had thus destroyed the last resort of the Doab Revolutionaries, and 
he was now going towards Fatehgarh from Cawnpore, bent on clearing the territory of the 
Doab, as far as the Ganges and the Jumna on either side, of the enemy altogether. The Nawab 
of Farrukabad, as has been already told, had declared his independence at Fatehgarh. The 
Doab Revolutionaries had flocked into Fatehgarh from all the adjoining parts. Sir Colin had 
many small engagements with these. As these Revolutionary troops were mostly composed 
of undisciplined people who had been defeated at Delhi and Cawnpore and had run away 
from the battle-field in those placed, they used to fly before the English, before the 
engagements had even begun, just to save their lives. But did they succeed in saving their 
lives by these dastardly means? Not at all. The English pursued them hard and, at times, 
would kill 600 or 700, sometimes even a thousand of the fleeing enemy. What a world of 
difference between the dying of those Itawa heroes and these! And the Nawab of Farukabad 
had soon to suffer the consequences of this dastardly conduct of these bands. His capital, his 
forts, and his military supplies fell into the hands of British and all the Revolutionaries were 
driven across the Ganges and into Rohilkhand. With the military supplies that were captured, 
Nadir Khan, the avowed enemy of the British, also fell into their hands. This Nadir Khan had 
fought the English on several occasions with credit under the flag of Nana Sahib at 
Cawnpore. As soon as such a formidable opponent fell into their hands, they hanged him. 
This Nadir Khan, at the point of death, swore a terrible oath “calling upon the people of India to draw their swords and assert their independence by the extermination of the English.”1 
This was the burning message delivered with his last dying breath by this glorious patriot, 
Nadir Khan. 
On the 4th of January 1858, at the time when Sir Colin entered Fatehgarh in triumpt, all the 
Doab and all the country from Benares upwards as far as Meerut had been reconquered by the 
British. So, now, the question was what was to be the future plan of operations of the British 
292 
army? The hope of the British, that, when the flames of rebellion had been extinguished in 
the Doab, the insurrections in other parts would quietly settle down, now proved absolutely 
futile. Experts in political astrology had prophesied that, within eight days of the fall of Delhi, 
the “mutiny” would be no more. As a matter of fact, the Revolution did not perish by the fall 
of Delhi, and all these prophecies had proved false. For the huge mass of the Revolutionary 
army, so far confined to Delhi, spread tumultuously all over the country like a river 
overflowing its banks. The troops of Rohilkhand under Bakht Khan, of Neemuch under Veer 
Singh, and other armies under their various Subahdars, instead of surrendering to the English, 
continued the war from other parts of the country. Once, right in Delhi itself, there seemed 
signs of another insurrection of the populace. For, a rumour had spread all over the city that 
Nana, after his victory at Cawnpore, had marched on to effect the release of the Emperor 
whom the English had imprisoned. Secret orders were immediately given to the military 
authorities that, should Nana really come to Delhi, the guards should rush in and shoot down the old Emperor like a rabbit!2 Since the fall of Delhi, the Revolutionaries had become even 
fiercer than before. They did not mind defeat now. The first ebullitions due to their victory 
had settled down by this time. A stoical calmness had now come over their hearts. Their one 
thought was that whatever happened they were to go on fighting. Either the Feringhis or they 
1. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 232. 
2. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 184. 
must be exterminated. They had determined, once for all, that, so long as neither of these was 
accomplished, they would continue the war to the end. They were quarrelling amongst 
themselves; some, for personal gain, were getting lawless; but to one was willing to give up 
the fight against the English. And, if ever this determination – never to keep down the sword 
until either the Feringhi or themselves had become extinct – appeared clearer than ever on the 
firmly set jaws, the contracted eyebrows, or the stern eye of the Revolutionaries, it was after 
the defeat in the Doab. Before the Sepoys who were captured in battle were hanged, they 
were usually questioned by the English why they joined in the war, and the Revolutionaries 
would answere clearly and sternly, “It is the command of religion that Feringhis should be 
killed!” And the end? The extermination of the English and of the Sepoys! And then? What God wills, will be done!3 
293 
Thus, after the fall of Delhi, the desire of liberty, instead of dying out, took only more fire. 
And to avenge Delhi, they continued the fight in Lucknow and Bareilley. For when the Doab 
had fallen to the English, the territories of Ayodhya and Rohilkhand were under the complete 
control of the Revolutionaries. Therefore,. Sir Colin’s idea was to conquer Rohilkhand first 
and then to proceed to Lucknow. Lord Canning urged that, once the focus of the operations of 
the Mutineers, namely Lucknow, was destroyed, the smaller places would surrender easily. In 
deference, therefore, to the orders of Lord Canning, Sir Colin determined first to attend to 
Lucknow. As previously agreed, Seaton, Walpole, and the commander-in-chief had brought 
together at Fatehgarh about ten or eleven thousand troops. In all the strategic positions of the 
Doab, small garrisons were stationed for keeping the province in hand. The army was 
reinforced by afresh batch of troops sent from Agra. With their larger reinforcements, Sir 
Colin started from Fatehgarh. English historians thus describe the magnitude of the English 
Forces at this time: “ Onao and Bunni deserts had probably never witnessed such big armies, 
engineers, artillery, horses, infantry, carriages full of supplies, camp-followers , tents big and 
3. “The slaughter of the English is required by our religion. The end will be the 
destruction of all the Ebglish and all the Sepoys, - and then, God knows!” – Charles Ball’s 
Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 242. 
small; all arrangements were complete in every particular. Seventeen battalions of infantry 
(of which fifteen were English), twenty-eight squadrons of cavalry (which included four 
European regiments), fifty-four light guns, and eighty big guns were included!” Thus, on the 23rd of February 1858, Sir Colin Campbell left Cawnpore, and crossed the Ganges again with 
such a splendidly equipped and large army in order to punish Lucknow. 
Oh Ganga, witness these strong English troops coming to destroy Ayodhya! And, O proud 
Ayodhya, are you at least now going to humble yourself to the dust frightened by these odds? 
Ayodhya must have felt that the crossing of the Ganges by the English was to destroy her. 
She must have felt for the reduction to dust of her villages and for the destruction of her temples and images by dynamite;4 but not so much for all these things as for the fact that the 
294 
Nepalese troops of Jung Bahadur were advancing on her. It was this that brought tears to the 
melancholy eyes of Ayodhya; it was advancing of this army that cast a shadow upon her face. 
Ayodhya was not a coward to fear the advance of the English army; for, if she had been, she 
would not have attempted to cast off the hated yoke of England. The very day that Ayodhya 
drove away from her domain the English authority by force, that very day, she was aware that 
an English army would soon advance on her; and aware of this, this brave Ayodhya had 
already stepped forth to the battle, with her thousand arms. But Ayodhya was not aware that 
on her would advance the Nepalese army of Jung Bahadur also. That the enemy would try to 
massacre her, she knew; but she did not know that her friends, her brothers, too, would raise 
the axe of destruction against her. She was ready to wrestle with the English, but she was 
ignorant of the shameful fact that she would have to wage war with a portion of Hindusthan 
herself, for the liberty of Hindusthan. And, thus, when, as if to mock at poor Ayodhya, Jung 
Bahadur started with the Nepalese troops to advance on her, Ayodhya looked in the direction 
of those troops only and began to shed tears of grief. 
For, atr the very time when the huge British army was crossing the Ganges with Sir Colin at 
the head, Jung Bahadur too with the Nepalese was advancing on Lucknow to help his friends, 
the English! The English were his friends and the Hindusthanees were his enemies! Those 
4. Russel’s Diary, page 218. 
who greased the cartridges with the fact of the cow were his confederates, and those who 
refused to bite them were his enemies! This Jung Bahadur, this blot on Indian history, 
brought eternal disgrace on himself and his family by joining the English as soon as he heard 
that the fight for Swaraj had begun. A little before 1857 he had visited England, and English 
historians assert that it was because he had seen with his own eyes the might and the glory of 
the English that he did not dare to fight against them! Was the glory and might of England 
indeed so awe-inspiring? If Jung Bahadur had been to England, Azimullah, the minister of 
Nana, too had been there; and so, also, Rango Bapuji; and history clearly records how this 
might have affected them, and how for every indication of that power, they only formed a 
fresh resolve to shatter it to pieces. The might of England alone would not explain the 
conduct of Jung Bahadur. The English glory only gave an additional stimulus to the patriotic 
hearts of Azimullah and Rango to make their Mother-Country a crowned queen with the 
295 
tilaka of Independence adorning her brow. On the other hand, the sight of English power 
whispered to snake-like Treachery that, if it helped to keep the Mother a slave of this might, 
perhaps two more crumbs would fall to its lot. 
And this Jung Bahadur, ready to sell his Mother for a mess of potage, sent his Nepalese to the 
English. First, three thousand Gurkhas from Khatmandu, in the beginning of August 1857, 
descended on Azimgarh and Jawanpur to the east of Ayodhya. Mahomed Hussein, the leader 
of the Gorakhpur Revolutionaries, was ready to meet them on the field. When the English 
were fighting in the Doab, Veni Madhav, Mahomed Hussein, and Raja Nadir Khan had, with 
credit to themselves, reconquered completely the parts round Benares and to the east by 
Ayodhya. Even before the English troops had time to look to Oudh, the Nepalese had pressed 
back the Revolutionaries towards Outh. Within a few more days, Jung Bahadur and the 
British came to a definite agreement and three armies were ready to advance on this province. On the 23rd of December 1857, Jung Bahadur and Rowcroft started each with a large division 
of the British army. And, crushing the Revolutionary armies on the way, on the north of 
Benares and to the east of Oudh, these three armies began to enter Oudh. 
About the 25th of February, 1858, the Nepalese and the English crossed the Ghogra and 
marched toward Ambarpur. On the way, there was a strong fort in a very thick jungle, 
possessing great strategic advantages. It would not have been safe for the English Army to 
proceed onwards without taking this fort. Hence the Nepalese were directed to attack this 
fort. The fort engaged in fight and continued it very vigorously in the face of this well- 
equipped enemy. The reader may inquire the strength of the army inside the fort which dared 
to stop this huge army on its way. It was an army composed of thirty-four persons only! But 
the minds of all of them were filled with the inspiring ideal of independence and it is this 
which gave them the strength to fight the enemies of the country in spite of such odds The 
Nepalese fought with determination. Their opponents fought with still greater vigour. 
Patgriotisn maintained its fight with Treachery. Everyone kept and maintained his place 
fighting, struggling hard. The name Ambarpur (Heavenly City) was eminently fitting to this 
fort; Ambarpur fought so well that it killed seven of the enemy and wounded forty-three. It 
fought so well that thirty-three out of the thirty-four who defended it, were killed without 
moving from their posts, and still the thirty-fourth did not cease from the fight! And it was 
only when the thirty-fourth was killed, after maintaining the fight to the very end, that the 
enemy could enter the fort. The fort of Ambarpur fought as Delhi could not fight, as Lucknow could not fight!5 
296 
After Ambarpur had been taken, the united forces of the Gurkhas and the English marched on 
reducing the country all the way. After them was also coming General Franks who, after 
engaging with Nazim Mahomed Hussain Franks who, after engaging with Nazim Mahomed 
Hussein and Commander Banda Hussein at Sultanpur, Budayan, and other places, was 
advancing upwards Oudh. In order to repair the loss of prestige caused by the recent defeats 
and to regain the authority till refently maintained in that part of eastern Oudh, the Lucknow 
Durbar sent Gafoor Beg, who was chief of the artillery under Wajid Ali Shah, to drive back Franks. But in the important battle of Sultanpur which took place on the 3rd of February he 
was defeated and, at the end of that month, there was no enemy left for the army of General 
Franks to encounter with in those parts. 
All these armies were approaching Lucknow to joinSir Colin. General Franks turned towards 
Daurara with the intention of taking the fort there; but, as the defenders of the fort maintained 
the fight in spite of the loss of their guns, General Franks had to acknowledge his defeat and 
retire. As a matter of fact, Franks had engaged in many a battle and been successful in most; 
5. “It was defended with so much vigour and resolution that the assailants lost seven 
men killed and forty-three wounded before they gained possession of it. The defendants died 
all at their posts.” – Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 227. 
nor could any harm have come through this small and unexpected defeat. But discipline and 
responsibility were maintained so well and vigorously in the English army at that time that, in 
spite of the innumerable victories of Franks, Sir Colin struck his name out from the list of the 
officers who were to command the English divisions in the important battle that was soon to 
take place. 
Now, the several portions of the British army advancing on Lucknow began to approach 
nearer and nearer to one another. While Sir Colin’s huge army starting from Cawnpore was 
approaching from the west, the armies of Franks and Jung Bahadur were advancing from the east. Before the 11th of March, these two armies met together and their swords were out to 
massacre the “sinful” city. 
297 
Sinful? Not sinful but only unfortunate! While the swords of fellow-countrymen and 
foreigners were smiting hard, was Lucknow doing anything to meet them? Since the time - 
in November of the previous year – when Sir Colin hurried towards Cawnpore to watch 
Tatia’s movements, till March, every patriot who was in Lucknow was trying his best, each in 
his own way, to protect Lucknow, and destroy the enemy. In honour of the flag of Swaraj 
which was floating high in Lucknow, everyone, from the Rajas to the poverty-stricken 
peasants, took his life in his hands and began the fight. Some of these Rajas and Zemindars 
had personally and individually lost nothing by the advent of English rule; nay, some of them 
had actually been benefited by it. But the noble principle that what cannot benefit the country 
cannot in the end benefit individuals, the noble determination not to give up duty at any time 
through love of personal gain, the Rajpur feeling that death is preferable to loss of honour, 
and the realisation of the truth that there can be no self-respect, no manhood, without liberty – 
all these noble ideas filled and pervaded the aristocracy of Lucknow. The Zemindars of 
Lucknow did not rise merely because they had suffered through the revenue assessment of 
the English but because they hated foreign rule! This is not merely our opinion but the 
deliberate opinion of the then Governor-General, as will be seen from the following extracts : 
“You seem to think that the Rajas and Zemindars of Oudh have risen because they have 
personally suffered by our land-revenue assessment. But, in the opinion of the Governor- 
General, this requires some more thought. More thorough-going hatred could hardly have 
been shown by any feudatories than was shown by the Rajas of Chanda, Bhinja, and Gonda. 
Not a single village of the first of these had been taken by us. Not only that but even his 
tribute had been reduced. The second one also was treated as generously. Of the four hundred 
villages of the third, only three had been taken and, in exchange for that, his tribute had been 
reduced by ten thousand Rupees. 
“By the change of rulers, no one had gained more than the youthful Raja of Nowpara. As 
soon as the English government came in, we gave him one thousand villages and, setting 
asided all other claimants, we appointed his mother as his guardian. But from the first, her 
army has been fighting us at Lucknow. The Raja of Dhura, too, gained enormously by the 
changes. But his own men attacked Captain Hursey, captured his wife, and sent her to prison 
in Lucknow. 
“Ashraf Baksh Khan, the Talukdar persecuted by his late master, was made at once sole 
owner of all his property. But from the beginning, his hatred of us has been most keen. These 
298 
and other similar examples go to show very clearly that not mere personal loss, due to our rule, has been responsible for the rising of the Zemindars and Rajas against us.”6 
And so the English historian, Holmes, frankly admits that several of the Rajas and Zemindars 
who had begun and maintained the War of Independence were inspired by a nobler idea than 
mere personal gain. “There were numerous Rajas and petty chiefs who, without any 
substantial grievance to brood over, were always fretting against the restraints of the 
Government, the very existence of which was always reminding them of the fact that they 
belonged to a conquered nation......... Among all these millions, there was no real loyalty 
towards the alien government which had been forced to impose itself upon them. In trying to 
estimate the conduct of the people of India during the mutiny, it is important to bear in mind 
that it would have been unnatural for them to feel towards an alien government like ours, the 
loyalty that can only co-exist with patriotism. Those of them who regarded our rule beneficial 
helped us or, at least, left us free to help ourselves. But there was not one of them who would not have turned against us, if he had once come to believe that we would be overthrown!”7 
6. Lord Canning’s Reply to the letter of Sir James Outram. (Re-translated from the 
Marathi translation in the original). 
7. Sepoy War by Holmes. (Re-translated from the Marathi Translation in the original). 
Those who blood boiled at the very name of foreign domination, those who had stepped forth 
into the battle field leaving their all to unfurl the honoured flag of Swaraj, Rajas, Maharahas, 
Zemindars, and Talukdars had, be it remembered, one amongst them, at this time, who was 
the first in the field to protect the revered throne of Lucknow and who was, at the same time, 
the ablest in the council. This extraordinary man had been for four months moving here and 
there with lightning-like activity, inspiring by his presence both the battle-field and the 
council-hall. 
Readers, this hero is none other than the Patriot of Fyzabad, Ahmad Shah Moulvie! With the 
burning torch of the Revolutionary War in his hand, he had been setting the whole country 
aflame, when the English authorities at Lucknow captured him and ordered him to be hanged. 
But, before being executed, he was taken to the prison at Fyzabad and there the storm of 1857 
299 
raised him from his cell in the alien’s prison to the leadership of the Revolution. This national 
hero, Ahmad Shah Moulvie, was on the battlefield for the freedom of his country and the 
protection of his Dharma. He inspired by his tongue thousands of his countrymen on the 
platform and, on the field of battle, by his valour he earned the admiration of friends as well 
as foes. 
When Sir Colin went to fight with Tatia, he had left Outram, in Alam Bagh with four 
thousand troops. Since that day, the Moulvie was working day and night to take advantage of 
this weakening of the enemy’s forces. Many a time, ere this, had Lucknow been protected by 
the diplomacy and diversions created by Nana near Cawnpore. The isolated army at Lucknow 
had been brought under the complete control of the Pandays. When the British army crossed 
the Ganges to capture Lucknow, Nana had pressed on Cawnpore and dragged the forces of 
the enemy back into Doab. But Lucknow had not taken full and determined advantage of this 
diversion. The Moulvie tried his best not to let go the other chance which had fallen in his 
way through the ability of Tatia. Though the Begum of Oudh was the chief authority in the 
place, it seemed that her efforts could not succeed in uniting and concentrating the 
Revolutionaries, Rajas, and Maharajas; internal disorganisation and carelessness had 
rendered useless many fine opportunities of destroying the handful of the British army by a 
good determined charge. Delhi had fallen; Cawnpore, also, had fallen; Fatehgarh had shared 
the same fat; and thousands of defeated Revolutionaries from the neighbouring parts had 
come to Lucknow. But, instead of helping Oudh, they became a source of mischief by 
disobedience to authority. It appeared certain that this last attack of the British who were 
flushed with their victories and well reinforced by numberless new troops would carry 
everything before them. But the Moulvie turned darkness into light. This patriotic Moulvie 
inspired with high patriotism many an Indian heart by his eloquence and the force of his 
personality. He showed that it was possible still to beat the English, if attempts were made to 
act with one mind and make concentrated charges against them. He inspired the Durbar with 
the confidence that he possessed and evoked some order out of the chaos in the army. He had 
great difficulties to cope with. Some incapables grew jealous of his growing influence in the 
Durbar and so brought about his arrest and imprisonment. But as the Moulvie had more 
influence over the Sepoys than the Begum herself, and as, further, the troops from Delhi 
trusted and obeyed him implicitly, pressure was brought to bear upon the Begum by these 
people and the Moulvie was released and his influence restored. After he was released, he 
was asked his opinion about the military situation. He replied, “The auspicious moment has 
passed. Things are out of joint. Now, we should fight only because it is our duty.” His 
300 influence over the populace of Lucknow was as great as ever. And he ended the petty 
quarrels amongst the troops and created in their minds a fresh inspiration and enthusiasm and 
desire to take up their swords for the destruction of the enemy knocking at their gates. 
But he did not stop with this activity alone. Very often he himself would personally lead them 
to the battles. Whenever Hindusthanees attacked Alam Bagh, the Moulvie was always to be seen in the very forefront of battle. On the 22nd of December, he had made a clever plan of 
deceiving the English army at Alam Bagh and hemming them in. He gave the slip to the 
English and marches on the road to Cawnpore with his troops. He had given orders that, as 
soon as he was behind the English army, a charge was to be made against the front of the 
English army by the division of the Revolutionaries that was at Alam Bagh. The plan was 
admirable and bound to have succeeded but for the other division. The leader of the other 
division could not maintain discipline among his followers. Everyone wanted to go by his 
own counsel, conscious of his own wisdom and, before the first charge had even commenced, 
they turned their back on the enemy instead of meeting the charge. On account of such 
cowardice and want of discipline, the Revolutionaries were defeated even though the 
Moulvie had carried out his part of the scheme most admirably. 
But the Moulview did not cease in his attempts to destroy the English army. On the 15th of 
January, the Revolutionaries received news that the English army was advancing from 
Cawnpore, carrying provisions and help to the British troops at Alam Bagh. They began to 
discuss the best means of stopping those supplies. But only discussions went on. No scheme 
was decided on, no arrangement adopted. Disgusted at the cowardice of the rest, the noble 
Moulvie swore before all that he would enter Lucknow right through the British army after 
having captured the convoy of the enemy. With this resolve, keeping his movements as far as 
possible concealed from the enemy, the Moulvie marched with his men on to the road 
towards Cawnpore. But through Indian spies, Outram was already informed of this and he 
had already sent a party to attack the Moulvie’s men. The battle began. The Moulvie, in order 
to encourage his men to do their utmost, himself fought in the front and did his very best. In 
the course of the engagement he was shot in the hand and fell down. The English had been 
most anxious for a long time to capture him. But the Revolutionaries skilfully placed him in a 
doli and brought him to Lucknow in great haste. When it was known that the Moulvie had 
been wounded, everybody was anxious about his condition. But they felt that the best way of 
showing their regard and respect for him was to complete the work that he had begun; and, therefore, without a moment’s rest, Videhi Hanuman – a brave Brahmin – started on the 17th 
301 
of January and made a desperate charge on the English troops. From ten in the morning to six 
in the evening, this brave man was fighting in the front ranks. In the evening, however, he 
was dangerously wounded and captured. The Revolutionaries were disorganised and ran 
away completely routed. These defeats increased the disorganisation in the Revolutionary 
camp. Charaterless Sepoys demanded pay before fighting. Though their pay had been given 
them in advance, they demanded more before they would consent to take the field. That the 
resolute, daring, and capable Begum still maintained, in spite of all these disorders, the whole administration intact is a sure indication of her grit.8 While these defeats were following one 
8. Sir W.Russell says about this Begum : “The great bulk of the Sepoy army is 
supposed to be inside Lucknow, but they will not fight as well as the match-lock-men of 
Oudh who have followed their chiefs to maintain the cause of their young king, Birjis Kadir, 
and who may be fairly regarded as engaged in a patriotic war for their country and their 
sovereign. The Sepoys during the siege of the Residency never came on as boldly as the 
Zemindari levies and Nujeibs. The Begum exhibits great energy and ability. She has excited 
all Oudh to take up the interests of her son and the chiefs have sworn to be faithful to him. 
We effect to disbelieve his legitimacy but the Zemindars who ought to be better judges of the 
fact accept Birjis Kadir without hesitation. Will Government treat these men as rebels or as 
honourable enemies? The Begum declares undying war against us. It appears from the 
energetic characters of these Ranees and Begums that they acquire in their Zenanas and 
harems a considerable amount of actual mental power and, at all events, become able 
intrigantes. Their contests for the ascendency over the minds of men give vigour and 
acuteness to their intellect.” – Russell’s Diary, page 275. 
upon another, the chief minister of revenue of the Begum, Raja Balkrishna Singh, died. Hardly was his would healed when the Moulvie again rushed into the field – on the 15th of 
February. He was anxious to finish Outram before Sir Colin was able to return from 
Cawnpore. But, day by day, the cowardice of the Sepoys was increasing beyond measure. All 
the Moulvie’s efforts were thus baffled and, on that day too, the Revolutionaries were 
defeated. But he went on fighting still. Amazed at the bravery of this man, the historian 
Holmes records in his book; “If however, the mass of the rebels were cowards, their leader 
was a man fitted both by his spirit and his capacity to support a great cause and to command a great army. This was Ammadullah – the Moulvie of Fyzabad.”9 All those who were fighting 
with the incomporable strength of calm philosophy fought bravely. The brave Subahdar of the 60th regiment swore to drive away the English from Alam Bagh in eight days and worked 
302 
hard in the field to effecthis purpose. One day, the Begum herself came on the field with all 
the army. But the unfortunate Lucknow could not get any victory. 
At last, Sir Colin joined the English troops before Alam Bagh. The English were straining 
every nerve to take Lucknow. But despite their innumerable attacks, that town had proudly 
stood so far under the flag of Swaraj. But now the English had determined not to move 
without taking it. As the English had concentrated all their forces at this place, so the 
Revolutionaries, too, were straining every nerve to give a good fight. All the fighting force of 
Oudh was there. From every village and every field came the patriotic rural population, with 
determination to drive away the Feringhis or die in the attempt. Charles Ball writes, “The 
whole country was swarming with armed vagabonds hastening to Lucknow to meet their common doom and die in the last grant struggle with the Feringhis.”10 There were thirty 
thousand Sepoys and fifty thousand volunteers gathered together in that city. All those who 
had taken the oath before the Revolutionary war, all those who had eaten the chapatee, all 
those who had smelt the red lotus flower, all those to whom had come the sacred messenger 
of the Revolution, all these patriots swarmed into Lucknow armed to the teeth with the object 
of fighting for their country and for their king. At least eighty thousand men were armed in 
9. Sepoy War by Holmes. 
10. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, p. 241. 
that city.11 In street and lane, barricades and entrenchments were erected; houses had 
ramparts made and holes bored in the walls for muskets or guns to be mounted; heroic spirits 
were posted on very wall; to the east, large canals were dug from the Gautami river and guns 
were stationed to command them; huge ramparts, three in one row, were erected right from 
Dilkhwush Bagh to Kaisar Bagh; the palace itself was reinforced with armed Sepoys and 
mounted with guns. In short, all parts except the northern portion of the city were fortified 
admirably by the Revolutionaries. 
Sir Colin recognised the weakness of the northern side and, from this very side, he began the 
attack. Before this, neither Havelock, nor Outram, nor Colin himself had attacked Lucknow 
from that side and, as the Gautami was on that side, the Revolutionaries naturally thought that 
303 
the north needed no protection. But Outram took full advantage of this weak link to the chain 
of their defences and, as this point gave way under the charge of Outram, the other defences were rendered useless. On the 6th of March, the British began their operations on the north of 
Lucknow. Soon after, the troops under Sir Colin had increased to nearly thirty thousand, and 
so the English attacked simultaneously from the north and the east. Sir Colin had so divided 
his army that not a single Revolutionary should escape alive from Lucknow. Though all the 
plans of the Pandays had been upset on account of the attack on the quarter least expected, namely, the northern side, they carried on their struggle, day and night frim the 6th to the 15th 
of March. For the third time in a single year, blood flowed freely in this unfortunate city. The 
British troops stormed one fort after another – Dilkhwush Bagh, Kadam Rasool, Shah Najeef, Begum Kothi, and others – and continued their advance. On the 10th, Hodson was killed by 
the Revolutionaries. It was this man that had shot down in cold blood the surrendered, 
innocent, unarmed Mughal princes of Delhi. Lucknow then avenged Delhi by killing this wicked criminal. On the 14th the British army entered right into the Palace. Giving a 
description of this triumph, Malleson writes : “Its greatness and magnificence were due mainly to the Sikhs and the 10th foot!” 
11. How the imagination is relied upon in giving the exaggerated numbers of the 
Revolutionaries will be best seen from the following example. Sir Hope Grant says that there 
were “thirty thousand Sepoys and fifty thousand volunteers” at Lucknow. Colonel Maleson 
records : “The total army of the mutineers was one hundred and twenty-one thousand;” and 
the civil commissioner who accompanied Sir Colin says : “Their army was exactly two 
lakhs.” Poor Holmes is simply bewildered at these amazing contradictions. 
But, while Sir Colin was overjoyed at this unique triumph in Kaisar Bagh, the news from 
Outram’s side disconcerted him not a little. For, though Lucknow had fallen, its thousands of 
Revolutionaries did not surrender or give up the fight; but, with their King and with the 
resourceful Begum, they had broken through the troops which tried to hem them in. 
And while, in Lucknow, streams of blood are flowing profusely on every side, while the 
triumphant British army is looting the palace, secure from danger, and while the Queen- 
mother and the King have left Lucknow, where, the reader asks, is Ahmad Shah? 
Let everyone bow down his head to do honour to this hero of heroes! The proud Moulvie is 
making his entrance again into the city, with his handful of followers. His proud heart hates 
304 
like poison the idea that Lucknow should fall, and that right in Lucknow English bayonets 
should cause bloodshed; he wants that, though Lucknow should fall, its name should not lie 
low; and so he leaves his post outside the city – and, while the Feringhis are laughing and 
joking and talking in the streets of Lucknow, attempts an entry into Lucknow! Annoyed by 
insults offered to his king, careless of his life, mad with devotion to his country, this Ahmad 
Shah Moulvie, only in order that history should record that Lucknow did not fall without a 
glorious fighting, entered a small part of the town, known as Shahdat Ganj, and there began 
to fight the enemy with his handful of followers. As Mazzini had clung to Rome, all alone, 
though the enemy had entered it and taken complete possession of it, so this Moulvie too, 
when all the other Revolutionaries had left Lucknow, when thousands of British troops were 
in it, continued the fight with the strength that despair gives! He thrust his hand right into the 
jaws of this Feringhi serpent, for it had swallowed Lucknow, and he wanted to snatch it back! 
Malleson writes : “Something remained to be effected even in the city itself. The Moulvie, 
the most obstinate of the rebel leaders, had returned to Lucknow; he was still there, at 
Shahdat Ganj, in its very heart, occupying, with two guns, a strongly fortified building whence he bade defiance to the British. To dislodge him, Lugard was detached, on the 21st , 
with a portion of the division which had conquered the Begum Kothi, the first day of the attack. The troops employed were the 93rd Highlanders and the 4th Panjab Rifles. Seldom did 
the rebels display so much pertinacity and resolution as on this occasion. They defended 
themselves most bravely and were not driven out until they had killed several men and severely wounded many others on our side.”12 
12. Kaye and Malleson, Vol. IV, page 286 
That was the last fight of Lucknow! 
When the heroic impulse of this struggle and those who carried it on had calmed down, they 
left that the flag of Swaraj for which they were fighting, was no more at Lucknow but that it 
was awaiting their uplifted swords in the wilds of Hindusthan. So, they moved away from the 
building. The enemy pursued them for six miles. But the Moulview again effected his escape. 
Now, Lucknow had completely fallen into the hands of the English. One must really dip 
one’s pen in blood to write the history of the vengeance that they wreaked on Lucknow! How 
the palace and the city were looted, how the citizens were massacred wholesale, how even 
dead bodies were insulted is a sad, sad story to tell. If, while reading the description of the 
305 
atrocities given by men like Russell, we bear in mind that this description is given by 
Englishmen, we would be able to have some faint notion of the terrible vengeance that was 
taken by the English. How different was the conduct of the Revolutionaries! We give below 
two extracts, both from English writers, so that the reader might judge for himself the 
difference between Indian and English vengeance. 
In the prisons at Lucknow, there were several English women and officers. For six months, 
their lives were spared. But when the English army entered the city at the first onslaught of 
Sir Colin, massacring all – innocent and guilty alike, the angered Revolutionaries went to the 
palace and wanted to take vengeance on some of the English prisoners. Accordingly, 
Lieutenant Orr, Sir Mount Stuart, and five or six other Englishmen were given over and they 
were immeidately shot down. But when they insisted that the English women-prisoners also 
should be killed, “to the honour of womanhood, the demand was imperatively refused by the 
Begum so far as the females were concerned, and they were immediately taken under her care in the Zenana of the palace.”13 
We give below, for comparison and contrast, one or two examples of the vengeance of the 
English. These have been given by Russell himself, the famous correspodent of the London 
Times. “While the massacre was going on in the palace, a frightened child was leading an old 
13. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 94. 
man. The old man came before the English authorities and, prostrating himself before them, 
asked that their lives should be spared. As if in answer to this wailing request the English 
officer took out his pistol and shot him on the temple! Again, he pressed the trigger but the 
shot missed. He pressed again but the shot again refused to kill the innocent boy. The fourth 
time – thrice he had time to repent – the gallant officer succeeded and the boy’s life-blood flowed at his feet!”14 
This incident has came out, because there was someone who would write about it. Many an 
other incident has not come to light, because there was no pen to record these. These 
atrocities were going on to such an extent that distinctions were actually drawn up between a 
merciful death and a cruel death! A murder, such as the one above, was a merciful death. The 
306 
cruel death which rendered even cold-blooded murder merciful meant something like the 
following : “Some of the Sepoys were still alive and they were mercifully killed; but one of 
their number was dragged out to the sandy plain outside the house; he was pulled by his legs 
to a convenient place, where he was held down, pricked in the face and body by the bayonets 
of some of the soldiery, while others collected fuel for a small pyre; and when everything was 
ready – the man was roasted alive! These were Englishmen, and more than one officer saw it; 
no one offered to interfere! The horrors of this infernal cruelty were aggravated by the 
attempt of the miserable wretch to escape when half-burned to death. By a sudden effort he 
leaped away and, with the flesh of his body handing from his bones, ran for a few yards ere 
he was caught, brought back, put on the fire again, and held there by bayonets, till his 
remains were consumed!”15 
* * * 
Delhi has fallen. Lucknow, too, has fallen. But the War of Independence did not flag. Seeing 
this unexpected result, the English were convinced fully that they had made a mistake in 
imagining that this Revolution was caused by the Sepoys and only for one or two grievances. 
This was no mutiny, it was a War of Independence! One or two grievances are not 
responsible for this rising, but political slavery, the source of all the innumerable grievances 
suffered – that along was the cause. The selfishness of personal gain lay not at its root, but the 
14. Russell’s Diary, page 384. 
15. Russell’s Diary, page 302. 
sacred flame of liberty, the glorious ideal of Swaraj and Swadharma, it is these that were 
burning there. Not only had the Sepoy risen to give his life’s blood with almost selfish 
eagerness to this sacred principles of Liberty, but the whole civil population all over the 
country, from villages as much as from towns, had also risen. Without that, this strength, this 
resolution, this selfishness, this grit would not have been displayed. For, Lord Canning had 
now issued a proclamation that those who would join the Revolution thereafter would see 
their lands and estates.confiscated, while those who surrendered at once would be forgiven. 
Yet the Revolutionary would not lay down his sword. Still Oudh persisted in her fight. 
Lucknow had fallen. But, Sepoy and shopkeeper, Brahmin and Moulvie, Rajas, Zemindars, 
and Talukdars, villagers and agriculturists – all Oudh was still making a rush forward! 
Dr.Duff writes about this terrible popular rising: “Why, if it had been a merely military 
307 
mutiny, in the midst of an unsympathetic, unaiding population, a few decisive victories, such 
as we have already had, might quash it or, as the phrase goes, stamp it out. But so far 
frombeing quashed or stamped out, it seems still as rampant and in some respects, more 
wide-spread and formidable than ever. And, it is a fact that it is not a mere military revolt, but 
a rebellion – a revolution, which alone can account for the little progress hitherto made in 
extinguishing it and, at the same time, precludes any reasonable hope of its early suppression. 
That it is a rebellion, and a rebellion, too, of no recent or mushroom growth, every fresh 
revelation tends more and more to confirm. And a rebellion, long and deliberately concocted, 
a rebellion which had been able to carry the Hindu and Mahomedan in an unnatural 
confederacy, a rebellion which is now manifestly nurtured and sustained by the whole 
population of Oudh and, directly or indirectly, sympathised with and assisted by well-nigh 
half of the neighbouring provinces – is not to be put down by a few victories over mutinous 
Sepoys, however decisive and brilliant. 
“From the very outset, it has been gradually assuming more and more the character of a 
rebellion – a rebellion on the part of vast multitudes beyond the Sepoy army, against British 
supremacy and sovereignty. Out real mutinous Sepoys. Had we only Sepoys for our foes, the 
country might soon have been pacified. 
“Never has the enemy been met without being routed, scattered, and his guns taken. But, 
though constantly beaten, he evermore rallies and appears again, ready for a fresh encounter. 
No sooner is one city taken or relieved than some other one is threatened. No sooner is one 
district pronounced safe through the influx of British troops than another is disturbed and 
convulsed. No sooner is a highway reopened between places of importance than it is again 
closed and all communication is for a season cut off. No sooner are the mutineers scored out 
of one locality than they reappear with double or treble force in another locality. No sooner 
does a moveable column force its way through hostile ranks than these reoccupy the territory 
behind it. All gaps in the number of the foe seem to be instantaneously filled up and no 
permanent clearance or impression seems to be made anywhere. The passage of our brave 
little armies through these swarming myriads, instead of leaving the deep traces of a mighty 
ploughshare through a roughened field, seems more to resemble that of the eagle through the elastic air or a stately vessel through the unfurrowed ocean!”16 
The truth described so picturesquely by Duff was realised by the English only at the end; but 
every individual of the Panday party had thoroughly realised it long, long before. Those who 
308 
died on the field for their country and their king were, of course, giving expression to such 
thoughts; but, even their women showed an equal determination. When the “brave” English 
attacked the Zenana of Lucknow, some Zenana ladies fell into their hands. Feringhi soldiers 
opened fire as soon as the door was forced and some of these ladies were killed! Those who 
survived were put in prison. Lucknow city was soon razed to the ground. The English were 
overjoyed at the prospect, as they thought, of the early surrender of the Revolutionaries. The 
jailors of these Ranees, sharing to the full the general feeling of joy of their compatriots, 
asked them mockingly, “Do not you think that the struggle has come to an end?” “On the contrary”, replied the Ranees, “we are sure that in the long run you will be beaten.”17 
16. Dr.Duff’s Indian Rebellion, pages 241-243. 
16. Narrative of the Indian Mutiny, page 338. Russell’s Diary, page 400. 
CHAPTER-VIII KUMAR SINGH AND AMAR SINGH 
HUNTED out of the valleys of Jagadishpur by General Eyre, Kumar Singh, the old but 
energetic lion of the territory of Shahabad was roaming restlessly but always on the alert for 
every chance to spring at the neck of those who had deprived him of his liberty. Under his 
banner had united his brother Amar Singh and two other chiefs, Nisswar Singh and Jawan 
Singh. They were now lying in wait in the forests. With them were their beloved wives, 
heroic women, but ready to join in the fight, combing their hair not with the delicate combs 
309 
of the Zenana but with sharp arrows, flourishing in their delicately fashioned hands, “tenderer 
than the very flower,” the flashing Damascus blade, “harder than adamant.” They were, also, 
waiting to drink the blood of the enemy! To drink the blood of the enemy, we say again; for, 
old as Kumar Singh was and proudly insolent as his opponent was, the ambition of Kumar 
Singh was nothing short of drinking the enemy’s blood! For, though “reduced to extremities 
with hunger, besieged by age, - a picture of hard misery, with no position, and courting 
death,” as the lion of the famous poem, our Kumar was still the king of the forest! And, 
therefore, whatever the reverses, how would he eat the dead grass of slavery? His ambition 
was – one ambition alone could be the ambition of the lion of the poem referred to – to break 
open, with his steel-claws, the skull of the elephant! 
With the land belonging to his family for generations as far as your memory could go now 
usurped by the stranger with his very palace of Jagadishpur in the hands of the foreigner, and 
his temples and images pulled down by the desecrating hands of the enemy, Kumar Singh did 
not show any excitement. He did not make a dash for Jagadishpur, nor did he persist in 
holding Shahabad. His capital was strictly guarded by the English and his army was small – 
only a thousand and two hundred Sepoys and five hundred untrained volunteers. He did not 
show, therefore, the least anxiety to recover his capital immediately. But his great desire was 
to hold aloft the bright golden banner of the War of Independence! The very day that he gave 
up Jagadishpur without serious resistance – that very day he had made up his mind to take to 
a different mode of warfare altogether. That mode of warfare is the one mode that goes 
farthest to secure success in any War of Independence. It is guerilla warfare. 
Therefore, enraged as he was at the loss of his capital, Kumar Singh sent not his army against 
the enemy, for then his soldiers would have perished like moths before the rushing enemy; 
but he moved quietly into the forests of West Behar and along the river Shon, carefully 
nothing the weak points of the enemy. In the meanwhile, news reached him that troops, 
Nepalese and English, were being sent from Azimgarh into Oudh to destroy Lucknow. As 
soon as with his keen scent he scented the prey, the lion of Jagadishpur took one leap out of 
the forest. Unlike those who would still, in fallen days, hover round their capital without the 
least chance, and unlike those weak persons who give way completely to passion and 
emotion to console themselves, our Kumar Singh was the very genius of guerilla warfare. 
Though the British army was marching on to Lucknow, they still had an eye on Jagadishpur, 
where his activities might be expected to be centred. Kumar Singh, therefore, postponed 
indefinitely his operations there and started for eastern Oudh, to make one spring for that part 
310 where the British army was weakest, hoping to surprise Azimgarh by uniting together all the 
revolutionaries that were scattered in eastern Oudh, and then to make a dash, if victorious, on Benares or even Allahabad and, thus, to avenge the Jagadishpur insult. On the 18th of March 
1858, even the Revolutionaries of Beeva joined him; and the united armies encamped near 
the fort in Atrolia. 
Azimgarh is twenty – five miles’ run from Atrolia. Learning that Kumar Singh was so near, 
Milman marched on Atrolia with three hundred infantry and horse and two guns. Before the morning rays of the sun of the 22nd of March had lighted the field of Atrolia, the vanguards of 
Milman and of the Revolutionaries were within sight of each other. Milman gave them not 
even a moment’s time to recover themselves, taken aback as they seemed to be by the sudden 
appearance of the British troops. He began the fight at once. But, of course, how long could 
the Revolutionaries fight against the British? They were soon totally defeated. What an 
ending to the vainglorious boast of Kumar Singh! All glory to the British army which showed 
such fine front even after the all-night march of the previous day. Ye have earned your 
breakfast, British soldiers, by the sweat of your brow, nay, by the free flow of blood from 
your bodies; so, enjoy your breakfast, with your commanders, in the cool share of the mango 
groved! The rays of the morning sun are welcoming you, gay because of the great victory 
earned so lately. Arms were arranged all around, breakfast was ready, the hungry mouths 
were chewing the first morsel; the cups of drink were filled ready, - and then! 
Boom, boom! What is up? The cups are dashed down from the lips, the morsels of food have 
slipped off the mouths, the breakfast dishes are shattered and, instead the army has to take up 
the arms only this hour laid down with a sense of relief! Has Kumar Singh come after all? 
Yes, yes! Kumar Singh has descended like a thunderbolt upon the English, who had been 
contemplating with delight their supposed victory. As soon as Milman was completely 
enticed into the security of a false victory, the hero – old in age but youthful in spirit – came 
out of the fort of Atrolia and smiled with contempt at the prey, now completely his. Malleson 
says: “What more could a general long for? Everything was in his favour. Kumar Singh, then, 
marched to a victory which he deemed assured. The imagination can almost picture him 
making to the confidant by his side an exclamation near akin to that which burst from the lips 
of Wellington when he noticed the false movement of Marmont which brought on the battle of Salamanca! Mon cher Alva, Marmont est perdu!”1 Still Milman struggled to escape and 
marched on with bondness, hoping to frighten Kumar Singh by keeping up a good and steady 
attack. But a regular shower of bullets was kept on from the avenues of sugarcane, from the 
311 
trees of the mango grove, and from the mud—banks everywhere. The army of Kumar Singh 
numbered five on six times that the Milman and, seeing that his enemy threatened to surround 
him completely, Milman was obliged to stop weakly in the midst of his hold attack. This 
weakness increased the determination of Kumar Singh to surround him. Now the British 
army, frightened and almost suffocated, began to fall back. Now began the wolf-like warfare 
of Kumar Singh’s troops, moving forward to shoot at stray soldiers and the flanks of the 
enemy. The temporary triumph did not turn Kumar Singh’s head. He did not attack unitedly 
the retreating troops of the enemy; for, he knew well the nature of the troops under him. He 
could not be sure how long they would have held on in a hand to hand fight. Hence, shrewd 
as he was, he determined only to continue the guerilla tactics. He drove the army of the 
enemy, hunting them from Atrolia straight to their camp at Kosilla. 
But the British army was destined not to get a safe refuge even in the Kosilla camp. Already 
the news of the defeat of the army had reached there and the Indian servants had left with 
their oxen and everything else that was in their keeping. No servants ahead, no provisions 
near, with Kumar Singh’s army preying on the stray unfortunates like wolves, Milman began 
his retreat leaving the camp behind him. Kumar Singh pursued – pursued even after he had 
taken complete possession of everything the enemy had, and hunted the British army and the 
1. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, p. 319 
miserable Milman from Kosilla right up to Azimgarh. At Azimgarh, Milman’s hopes revived 
again! For, there he had aid of three hundred and fifty fresh forces from Benares and 
Ghazipur, who had come in response to his express message. Colonel Dames was the 
commander of the united forces. With a strong base like Azimgarh, with the British army 
reinforced to double the former number, with Colonel Dames to lead them – they determined 
to take revenge for the temporary defeat, come what might! 
So Colonel Dames set out from Azimgarh resolving to revenge himself on Kumar Singh on the 28th of March. He thought he had his revenge, for he was victorious over Kumar Singh; 
but it was only to find the old game repeated again, perhaps better than before. The fresh 
soldiers with their fresh commander got such a sound bearing that Colonel Dames ran from 
the field right to Azimgarh and took refuge within the fortifications of the city. No one now 
312 
even spoke of attacking Kumar afresh. Kumar now entered Azimgarh and leaving the work 
of annihilating the few Englishmen in the fortifications to a few of his followers – and to 
famine – he pushed on triumphant to Benares! 
The governor-general who, as we have said before, was now at Allahabad, was filled with 
terror, now that the lion had opened wide his jaws. “Knowing what sort of a man Kumar 
Singh was, that he possessed audacity and courage, and that he knew the value of time in military operations, Lord Canning realised at once the danger of the situation.”2 He who had 
just imprisoned the English forces at Azimgarh and, having marched with wonderful rapidity 
the eighty-one miles of the way, had threatened to cut off Allahabad from Calcutta by 
attacking the city of Benares, he – the Rana Kumar Singh, reinforced as he now was by the 
Sepoys flying away after the defeat at Lucknow and knowing full well the art of keeping 
together and in discipline even such demoralised forces as he had, was not to be lightly 
treated by Lord Canning. It was owing to the firm grip on the cities of Allahabad and Benares 
which the English could maintain through the loyalty of the Sikhs in the first part of the 
mutiny, that the rebellion was nipped in the bug in the provinces round Calcutta; and when it 
seemed the design of Kumar Singh to catch again the lost opportunity by dashing on Benares 
and Allahabad, Lord Canning ordered Lord Mark Kerr himself to march on this ‘rebel’ chief 
in all haste. 
2. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 321. 
Lord Mark Kerr, well known in the Crimean campaigns and well experienced in Indian 
military matters, marched off at once with five hundred men and eight guns and arrived 
within eight miles of Azimgarh. After a little rest, he started onwards on the morning of the 6th of April. At about six o’clock in the morning, he learnt that Kumar Singh’s men had been 
watching his progress. But pretending ignorance of this fact, he ordered his army to advance 
in readiness and at once commenced the attack on Kumar’s left flank. No sooner did the 
English commence the attack than Kumar’s left began a veritable shower of bullets on the 
enemy. On that day, the old Kumar was seen fighting lightning-like in the thick of the battle, 
seated on his favourite white horse. Knowing full well that the strength of his army was not 
so much in their number which was simply swelled as a threat to the enemy by allowing all 
sorts of camp-followers to enter the fighting ranks, Kumar Singh solely relied upon his own 
skill and courage and intrepidity. 
313 
He spread out his force to attack Lord Mark Kerr on his flanks. The guns of the enemy were 
vomiting fire upon him and he had no guns to silence them, still did he succeed in bringing 
his army right to the rear of Lord Mark! This movement upset the plan of the enemy so 
totally that their guns had to fall back; and this was the signal for the Revolutionaries to rush 
forward with a triumphant war-cry. Kumar Singh had, by this time, tightened his grip on the 
English rear so firmly that the English elephants began to run amock, the conductors on them 
lost all hope of life and clung round their necks with both hands, and the servants and all 
began to run wheresoever they found a way. Yet Mark Kerr said “Let us hold on for a while – 
victory might still be ours!” He had captured some houses on the Revolutionaries’ front, 
while they had totally routed his rear.Thus was this strange battle fought. In the beginning, 
the front of Kumar was opposed to the front of the English army and now the rear of the 
British army is opposed to the front of Kumar; now he has even set the rear of the enemy on 
fire! When Mark Kerr saw the rear surrounded in flames of fire, he dedtermined to leave the 
battlefield and began to press on to Azimgarh. For, if not victory, at least the secondary 
purpose of carrying succour to Azimgarh should be accomplished if possible. His guns did 
him a splendid service, specially as Kumar Singh had none with him. At midnight, Lord 
Mark brought his army to Azimgarh. About this battle and the strategic movements and 
errors of Kumar Singh and the difficulties under which he laboured, Malleson says :- “That 
leader had showed himself greater as a strategist than a tactician. His plan of campaign was 
admirable but, in carrying it into execution, he committed many serious errors. Milman gave 
him a great, an unexpected opportunity. He had that officer at his mercy. When Milman’s 
men were waiting for their breakfast in the mango grove near Atrolia, it was in the power of 
Kumar Singh to cut them off from Azimgarh. He preferred to attack them in front. Then, 
when he had forced him to fall back, he did not press the pursuit with sufficient vigour. A 
capable commander would still have cut them off. Once having seen them housed in 
Azimgarh, he should have left a portion of his force to blockade them, pressed on with the 
remainder towards Benares, and occupied a position in which he could have engaged Lord 
Mark Kerr with advantage. He had at his disposal, it subsequently transpired, about twelve 
thousand men. To oppose these the few men led by Lord Mark were alone available. 
Everything was within his grasp had he dared to stretch out his hand. The chances are that, 
capable man as he was, he saw all this. But he was not supreme master of the situation. Every 
petty leader who had brought his contingent to serve under him wished to dictate a programme. The counsels of the rebels tended, then, almost always to a compromise.”3 
314 
But Lord Mark Kerr was baulked not only of his victory but even of this secondary purpose 
of relieving Azimgarh. For still the whole city was in the hands of the Revolutionaries who 
had also a perfect hold of the whole surrounding province. A born commander is he who 
knows exactly the nature and capacities of his forces. Few men could have excelled Kumar 
Singh in this necessary quality of a commander. As he had correctly gauged the power and 
strength of his enemy, even so he measured the merits and demerits of his own followers. 
Therefore is it that he did not try at all to attack and carry the fortress in which the English 
had taken refuge. He had closely observed the fact that the Sepoys, for whatever reasons or 
panic it might be, were ready to undergo any other ordeal but that of facing the English 
bayonets – a fact which had been clearly demonstrated in both the sieges of Arrah and 
Lucknow. Therefore, having rendered it difficult for the English forces to come out of the 
besieged fortress, he began to plan in his daring heart quite another scheme of worsting his 
enemy. In the forces of the Revolutionaries that had entered the field in 1857, it was clearly 
seen that there were men of two different temperaments – the one class, who would throw 
themselves right in the jaws of death with unflinching and firm and disciplined resistance on 
the battle-field, whether opposed to the cannon or the bayonet of the foe; the other who, 
possessing the will to die for the nation but lacking in the courage to carry it into effect, 
would flinch back and get routed at the very moment when they ought to have stood 
unmoved. Out of these two sorts of men, Kumar Singh collected those who belonged to the 
3. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, pages 326-327. 
first sort and had proved immovable in the field, and organised them into a separate band of 
chosen veterans. Having made this selection and created a body on whom he could depend 
for any adventure however difficult, Kumar Singh became ready to put into execution the 
daring scheme which he had set his heart upon, and ordered his newly selected veteran band 
to stand on the bridge of the Tanu river. 
For, it was by this little bridge that a British general, named Lugard, was marching ahead to 
relieve the English forces at Azimgarh. Lugard first, and most naturally, thought that the 
object of this Revolutionary band in contesting the passage of the bridge was simply to 
preserve the grip of the Revolutionaries on the city of Azimgarh. “But”, says Malleson, “the 
wily chieftain had matured plans far deeper than even those about him could fathom.” This 
unfathomable plan of the wily chieftain was to deceive the enemy by a false show of holding 
315 
Azimgarh at any cost, to fix their whole attention there on that spot and, while they were thus 
completely beguiled there, to march off straight on to Jagadishpur. This scheme was 
matchless in its military widsom. To march off from Azimgarh to Ghazipur, thence to jump 
into the Ganges, to cross it, to press on, and to reconquer Jagadishpur – all this in spite of the 
pursuing force of Lugard at the rear and in the face of the deluded English force of Arrah in 
front! It was for the execution of this very bold plan that he ordered his veteran band to guard 
the bridge of the river Tanu. His orders to those veterans were to hold the bridge against the 
attacks of Lugard till the other division of his forces had time to leave Azimgarh and escaping 
the vigilance of the English, to take the road leading to Ghazipur. If once he reached 
Ghazipur and crossed the Ganges, the lion would be back again into his native forests of 
Jagadishpur, and the English must re-enact the whole drama right anew, as all that they had 
done during the previous twelve months would be as if not done at all. 
But to succeed in all these plans depends upon your bravery, O soldiers on the bridge of the 
Tanu! You must not allow the British forces under Lugard to step upon this bridge till the 
whole army of Kumar Singhhas gone out of the range of the enemy’s sight! You have been 
selected by your chief in the brief that you alone would rise equal to the occasion. May your 
bravery not belie his confidence! Let one thought, one determination, one vow alone be 
yours, namely, not to let the enemy capture this bridge till Kumar Singh had led off in safety 
his whole force out of the sight of the duped enemy! As Baji Deshpande, the Mahratta 
soldier, held out in the famous gorge of Pavankhind till Shri Shivaji could reach the fort of 
Rangana in safety, even so fight on hard and hot till Kumar’s order is carried out to the letter, 
his forces saves and his confidence vindicated! Lugard, too led assaults after assaults on his 
handful of the Revolutionary band as often as Fazul did against the Mahratta, but he could 
not gain a foot-hold on the bridge even for a second. Every charge of the English was firmly 
and vigorously repulsed by the Revolutionary forces who were defending it. Till Kumar 
Singh signalled to them his safe departure from Azimgarh and his successful march on the 
way to Ghazipur, the veteran band held this bridge, contesting it inch by inch! Col. Malleson 
says, “They held the bridge of boats with a resolution and perseverence worthy of veterans, 
and it was not until they had by their long residence ensured the safety of their comrades, that they fell back.”4 Thus, the brave band accomplished its mission, fell back with perfect order, 
and, as settled, succeeded in rejoining their chief, Raja Kumar Singh. 
Seeing the suggen evacuation of the bridge, Lugard rushed on, but found, to his utter dismay, 
the magic-like disappearance of the whole army of Kumar Singh, as if it never was there! So 
316 
to pursue and find out this invisible force, he despatched a detachment of European cavalry 
and a horse battery. Twelve miles did they gallop on; yet, Kumar singh could not be found – 
and when found at last, he was found in such a strong position as to make it impossible to 
distinguish who was the pursuer and who the pursued! It was not the Revolutionaries who 
were frightened at the sight of the foe but it was the English forces who seemed to have lost 
their balance at the sight of the Revolutionaries. Kumar Singh’s army was drawn up in battle 
array, with their swords unsheathed and with their guns pointed at the enemy. One of the 
English officers engaged in this fight says, “It was all we could do to hold our own against 
such odds. Immediately our cavalry charged, they stood and formed square and used to abuse 
and tell us to come on.” And, when the English did go on, they received them with such a hot 
welcome that many soldiers and even officers on the side of the English fell dead. The 
squares of Kumar’s forces remained impenetrable, and the English were completely thrown 
on the defensive. After this engagement, Kumar Singh pursued his march and was 
approaching nearer and nearer to the banks of the Ganges! 
News of the ill-success of the English pursuing force reached Azimgarh. The British general, 
Douglas, started with five or six more guns and came to their aid. Douglas had already tasted 
the sharpness of Kumar’s sword, and so he came on with circumspect steps as far as the 
4. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 330. 
village Naghai, in pursuit of the Raja. There also the Raja was quite ready. When the forces 
were within striking distance, Kumar Singh led on his veteran band to face the foe and again 
ordered them to fight on till the signal should come, and, dividing the remaining forces into 
two parts, he despatched them onwards by two different routes to the banks of the Ganges. 
While these movements were secretly being carried out, the veteram band kept up a vigorous 
fight with the enemy, in spite of the lack of gund to reply to the hot fire of the enemy’s 
artillery which was mowing them down like grass. They wavered not, nor did their ranks 
break up, nor did their charge flag in the least! For our miles this living battle pressed on! At 
last, when the army of the enemy showed signs of exhaustion, the two divisions of Kumar 
Sing’s army, until now going by different routes, united together and the whole force 
marched unhampered, and Raja Kumar Singh was again marching nearer and nearer towards the banks of the Ganges! This exhausted British force passed the night of the 17th of April 
317 
near the village of Athusi. Early in the morning, Douglas, thinking he had given no start to 
the Revolutionary forces, ordered a march again – only to find that Kumar Singh was already 
thirteen miles ahead to him. The whole of the British horse and the British artillery had been 
pursuing Kumar Singh; but, as the British infantry, through total exhaustion, were unable to 
proceed further, they were given rest for another night. The scouts of Kumar Singh were 
matchless in bringing him all detailed information about the enemy’s plans and whereabouts. 
They did not fail to inform him of their exhausted condition. At this, the old general stood up, 
determined to take full advantage of this chance and, with his force, the octogenarian chief 
recommenced the march in the midnight and came straightway to Sikandarpur, reached the 
river Ghogra, crossed it, and entered the province of Ghazipur. He presseed on right up to the 
village of Manohar, and there ordered a temporary rest to the now tired, worn-out, and 
hungry forces which had so bravely responded to the intrepid will of their patriotic chief. It 
was humanly impossible to avoid stopping here, though Kumar Singh knew full well that the 
poosition was rather a weak one. When Doughlas heard that Kumar had gained a start over 
him, he started in hot pursuit and eventually reached Manohar soon after Kumar Singh. He 
began the attack immediately and, as the Revolutionaries were tired on account of their long 
and continuous marching, their stand was feeble and they lost the battle, losing also many 
elephants and ammunition and food supplies. But Kumar Singh’s heart and will remained as 
much unconquered and unconquerable as ever. For, no sooner he was the signs of a crushing 
defeat than he put into execution the same tactics that he had hitherto been pursuing. He 
divided his troops into small bands and, as each division effected its retreat from the losing 
battle-field by a different route, the pursuit of the enemy was frustrated. Kumar had given the 
captains of the different bands definite instructions to meet at a pre-arranged place at a fixed 
hour, and lo, when the hour struck, Kumar Singh’s forced had come together and were ready 
for their march. This place where they met was so completely hidden from the enemy that the 
victory of the English was altogether barren of any result, and so the English commander had 
to stop at the village of Manohar itself to ascertain the whereabouts of Kumar Singh’s army, 
while Kumar Singh and his forces were all the while marching nearer and nearer to the banks 
of the Ganges! 
Nearer and nearer to the banks of the Ganges! Nay, now, he has won the terrible race and 
actually reached the banks of the Ganges. The English forces were also close upon his rear. 
But, as his forces were now greatly reduced, he decided that it was not wise to fight the 
enemy and so he now pursued quite diffeent tactics. He spread a rumour all over the province 
that, owing to the scarcity of boats, his forces were going to cross the Ganges on the baks of 
318 
elephants somewhere near a place called Balita. The English scouts brought the news to the 
general who must have felt triumphant of the efficiency of his intelligence department! How 
can now this rebel chief succeed in crossing the Ganges when my scouts have enabled me to 
know the exact place where he intends to cross the river? – He is doomed to be drowned 
along with his elephants! So, the British general, with his white forces, went to Balila and 
kept himself in concealment, elephants of Kumar Singh as soon as they would appear. Brave 
soldiers! Enjoying all the while the sweet prospects of success, conceal yourself near Balila 
till the looked for enemy comes! There, seven miles below this very spot, is Kumar Singhh 
actually crossing the river Ganges! Having duped the English by the story of the elephants 
and Balila, the Raja got together as many boats as he wanted and, from the Ghat of Shivapur, 
he began to the scaret Bhagirathi at night.The duped foe, awaked to this fact, got extremely 
irritated and, hurriedly marching from Balila, reached Shivapur and even succeeded in 
capturing a boat belonging to Raja – but that was the last boat! The whole army had already 
been sent on the other side and in a minute or two the chieftain too, having supervised the 
crossing of the army, would have crossed the river himself. But, alas! What a calamity this 
one moment has brought with it! While this hero of the nation, the pride of chivalry, the 
sword of Liberty – Rana Kumar Singh was in the middle of the stream, a bullet shot from the 
enemy’s gun entered his wrist! But old as he was, the octogenarian leader did not mind it at 
all! And when amputation was deemed necessary, with his own hand – the hand that was not 
wounded – Kumar Singh unsheathed his sword, lopped off the wounded arm at the elbow, 
and threw it into the sacred Ganges saying, “Accept thou, Mother, this last sacrifice of a 
loving son!” 
Though innumerable are the people who have addressed the Ganges as Mother, it is Kumar – 
this brave son of Ganga, and such as he, that make the motherhood of the sacred Ganges 
fruitful and glorious. As the poet says, innumerable are the stars that are in the sky; but, it is 
the moon alone that adorns it and makes it lovely! 
After offering this sacrifice to the Mother Ganges, this distinguished son succeeded in 
crossing the river without further trouble from the English army. The enemy, on the other 
hand, like a hunter whose prey is escaped out of his reach, unable to cross the river, stopped 
there with their pride wounded and mission unaccomplished. The lion, now triumphant by 
freeing itself from the hunter’s nets and lances, again rushed into his native forests of Shahabad, came to Jagadishpur and, on the 22nd of April, re-entered this his old capital. It was 
from this capital that he was hunted out eight months back. Once more now, in the palace of 
319 
Jagadishpur is ruling the prince of Jagadishpur. His brother, Amar Singh, who had collected 
together a force of patriotic peasants and villagers even before Kumar Singh had crossed the 
Ganges, now joined him. The brave Kumar ordered out in divisions these united forces to 
guard the capital on all sides, while he too, as intrepid and unexhausted as ever, took again to 
warfare. 
The entrance into Jagadishpur was so sudden and dashing that the British forces at Arrah 
which had been kept there for the express purpose of watching Jagadishpur had no notice of 
Kumar Singh’s descent on Arrah. Thus outwitted, Le Grand, the British general at Arrah, 
became wild at the discovery of this his enemy’s triumph. What audacity that this rebel chief 
should give the slip to all the British forces in East Oudh, should enter Jagadishpur, and even 
begin to rule with all the pomp of an independent prince here, under the very nose of the 
British general? It is not even eight months since Sir Eyre had chased this rebel out of these 
forests; - well, even like that will this Le Grand rush in the Jagadishpur wilds to hunt down 
this marauding chief. With this hope, the brave general, with four hundred British troops and two guns, marched on the doomed city of Jagadishpur on the 23rd of April. How, now, is it 
possible that this field should be contested by Kumar Singh? During all these months, the old 
warrior had been fighting incessantly and without a moment’s rest; his forces had never been 
able to snatch a hearty meal or an undisturbed sleep; but yesterday had he come to 
Jagadishpur after the death-dealing struggle in East Oudh, and he and his forces had not even 
taken one day’s rest. According to the English official report itself his forces were 
“disjointed, badly armed, and without guns,” numbering at the most to a thousand, with very 
few trained soldiers amongst them, and the octogenarian chief himself was founded mortally 
in his hand! Against this army was marching the fresh, the vigorous, the disciplined forces of 
the British, well armed with guns and led by General Le Grand. The issue of the battle was, 
then, a foregone conclusion! And with this full confidence, the English army entered the 
forest which was about one mile and a half from the town. The English guns began to thunder 
forth unchallenged, for Kumar Singh had no guns to oppose them. But, still, it seems that he 
means to smother us in this thickly grown jungle by stretching out his forces round us; - well 
then, let the all unfailing stroke be given. Let that straight and bold front attack of the 
Europeans, which had always been the terror of the Asiatics, be ordered! It was ordered; the 
Europeans rushed forth irresistible; the army of Kumar Singh, too, began to contest; and none 
knows how, but in a moment, the brave Briton got confused and struck with terror and 
sounded the retreat. But, though the bands sounded the retreat, as Kumar Singh held the 
320 British force in his grip, it was more dangerous to attempt a treat than even to try to make a 
stand. But, if retreat is as ruinous as a stand, then, O brave Briton, why not make a stand to 
prove that unflinching courage of your people which so many times you have boasted that 
you possess? Matters not whether it is proved or disproved, he along lived who ran! And they 
did; all the British forces, like hunted deer, left the jungle and began to fly wherever the way 
led, while Kumar Singh’s army pursued them hot and the rout was complete! One of the men 
who himself was present in this rout, writes to this effect of his experience, in a letter written 
at the time: - “Indeed, it makes me extremely ashamed to write what followed. We began 
flying out of the jungles, leaving the battle-field and being constantly beaten by the enemy. 
Our people, dying of thirst, rushed forth at the sight of a wretched, dirty pool of water, in the 
most confused manner possible. Just then, the horses of Kumar Singh closed upon our rear. 
Henceforth, there was no limit to our disgrace, and the disaster was complete. No sense of 
shame was left in any one of us. Everyman ran wherever he thought his safety lay. Orders 
were thrown to the winds. Discipline and drill were dead. In all directions, nothing could be 
heard but sighs, curses and wailings. Bands of Europeans dropped dead in the flight by 
sunstroke. Nor was it possible to ask for medicine; for, the dispensary was already captured 
by Kumar Singh. Some died there and then; the rest cut down by the enemy; the carriers 
dropped the dolis and fled; all was confusion – all terror! Sixteen elephants were all full- 
laden with the burden of the wounder. General Le Grand himself was shot dead by a bullet in 
his breast! Soldiers running for their lives for five miles and more had now no strength, even 
for lifting up their guns. The Sikhs, accustomed to the heat of the sun, took off the elephants 
and fled away ahead of all. None would be with the white. Out of a hundred and ninety-nine 
whites, about eighty alone could survive this terrible massacre! We were led into this jungle like cattle into the slaughter-house, simply to be killed!”5 
The forces of Kumar Singh were thus completely successful. They had in spite of the fact that 
they had no artillery to speak of on their side, routed the British forces with a terrible loss and slaughter, and had captured even the two guns which the British had so proudly brought.6 
But, one fact is most significant in this pursuit; the number of Sikhs that fell on that day was 
only nine. It substantiates most thoroughly the tradition that Kumar Singh was in the habit of 
issuing strict injunctions to spare as many lives as could be spared of the Indian people even 
though they were on the enemy’s side, while there should be no mistaken mercy shown to the 
foreigh foe. In the first outbreak of the Revolution many of the Babus of Bengal were made 
prisoners, for joining the English side, by Kumar’s men; but he not only released them but 
sent them without harm on elephants to the city of Patna where they wished to go. When the 
321 
Sepoys determined to burn down all government papers written in English, it was Kumar 
who stopped them from doing so, as “otherwise, after the English were driven out of the 
country, there would be no proof of the rights of the people, and no evidence to determine the 
amount due from one party to the other. 
Having vanquished his foe thus completely and thoroughly, the old chief, Rana Kumar Singh, entered again his palace of Jagadishpur on the 23rd of April, crowned with fresh laurels and a 
fresh fame! 
This was his last entrance, for no more will Kumar Sing re-enter on the stage of the world. The wound caused by the amputation of his hand proved mortal and, on the 26th day of April, 
the third day after his latest victory, the great Rana died in his own palace. He died on an 
independent throne and under the flag of freedom. The day he died, it was not the Union Jack 
of the British Isles but the Golden Banner of a free and liberated nation, the triumphant 
symbol of his Desh and Dharma, that was waving radiant over the palace of Jagadishpur. It 
was under the cool shade of this banner that he died. What nobler death can a Rajpur long 
for? 
5. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 288. 
6. “The English sustained on this occasion a complete defect of the worst kind.” 
White’s History of the Mutiny. 
7. Arya Kiti by Rajani Kanta Gupta of Bengal. 
He had avenged his wrongs; he had, with poor means, worsted a mighty foe more than once 
in a fair battle-field; he had not proved a traitor to the nation nor a renegade to his Dharma 
but had broken the chains that bound his land and made her free so far as one man could do 
it, and to-day, in a noble field, he had been crowned by Victory’s own hands with a wreath of 
laurels. Then, this is the auspicious day : this is the supreme moment for you, O great Rajput, 
to close your eyes for ever, to lay down your body – not through disease, but even as a 
worthy sacrifice to the cause of your mother’s freedom, by the wounds received on the battle- 
field! Let your death be as noble and as matchless as was your life! 
He died on that day and under the banner of a free people. What nobler death can a Rajput 
wish for?8 
322 
The personality of Shrimant Kumar Singh is striking in more than one respect. His personal 
dash and high character had naturally infused in his army the two indispensable virtues of 
discipline and bravery. It is rarely the case that persons who are called upon to lead a nation’s 
regeneration are in their private morals as unimpeachable as they are unchallengeable in their 
public ability. This rare consistency of character was conspicuous in great degree in the life 
of this great Indian. Such was the influence of his pure conduct on his people that none would 
dare even to smoke openly in their verandahs for fear of being seen by him. Amongst all the 
leaders of the Revolutionaries in 1857, there was none who could surpass Kumar Singh in 
military ability. It was he who at once grasped trhe utility of guerilla warfare in the War of 
Independence and it was he alone who could imitate the masterful tactics of a veteran guerilla 
leader like Shivaji. If we compare the two great generals that 1857 brought to the front, Tatia 
Tope and Kumar Singh, in their military achievements as guerilla leaders, we shall be struck 
with one distinguishing point. To Tatia Tope may be at once assigned a very high place in the 
negative side of guerilla warfare, while Kumar Singh holds the position with equal eminence 
in the positive as well as in the negative side of it. Tatia Tope did not allow the enemy to 
completely crush his forces or his power to raise them, but Kumar Singh, while succeeding in 
8. The English historian, Holmes, says : “The old Rajput who had fought so 
honourably and so bravely against the British power died on April 26, 1858.” – History of the 
Sepoy War. 
doing this, could even succeed in crushing the enemy’s forces by severe defeats. To ensure 
ultimate success, it is imperatively necessary in guerilla warfare to prevent the demonstration 
of one’s followers which the constant flights from the field or avoidance of battles against a 
mightier foe do inevitably tend to beget. The defeats which are suffered intentionally by the 
leader, and the flights which he finds it necessary to effect, ought not to be allowed to create 
demoralisation or diffidence in the minds of his followers. The constant avoidance of battles 
ought not to be allowed to create in the followers a fear for battle itself. The skilful avoidance 
of a battle and a panic-stricken flight in the course of the battle are two very different things. 
So it is most important in guerilla tactics never to leave the field through cowardice; but 
whenever a battle is decided to be given, it sould be given so sternly and dashingly as to 
strike a sudden terror into the heart of the enemy and to infuse an overwhelming confidence 
into the heart of one’s own followers. The main skill lies in taking care never to be forced to 
323 
give battle where the chances are of an unequal contest. But once the die is cast, such must be 
the tenacity and desperation in contesting the field as was shown by Baji in the Pawankhind 
or by Kumar Singh on the Tanu Nadi. In short, if the strength is unequal, the leader should 
not get entangled into a battle; if the chances are equal, he should cast the die; but, in either 
case of a forced or voluntary contest, never should a battle once begun be left, through fear or 
want of discipline, but, on the contrary, it should be fought on so desperately and so bravely, 
in spite of an assured defeat or of an immediate death, as never to lose fame, though success 
be lost in the field. Thus attacked, the enemy is struck with error, the followers do not get 
demoralised, discipline is not slackened, and inspiration increases by stories of martyrdom; 
bravery begets bravery, and victory becomes insured. The guerilla general and his forces 
should never give the least chance to create an impression that their foe conquered them 
through superiority in bravery. This is the key to guerilla warfare. 
But Tatia Tope could not follow this positive side of this warfare. Tatia’s campaigns when 
trying to cross the Narbada and Kumar’s campaigns when trying to cross the Ganges 
demonstrate this difference. Tatia suffered many a defeat. Though this was due entirely to the 
panicky and sometimes even cowardly conduct of the Sepoys, he had to lead and could not be 
attributed to any inferiority in his capacity. Kumar Singh, while marching off, had all the 
while kept up such a bold front and, whenever opportunity offered, had hit his pursuing foe 
so hard, that all the while his forces were full of self-confidence and high inspiration in spite 
of the fact that they were retreating before pursuing enemy. Now, it ought not to be forgotten 
that Tatia had to take up to guerilla tactics when his forces were already completely 
demoralised by previous defects and when all the veterans had been either killed or disabled 
in the earlier stages of the war, and so it was quite natural that, in spite of his skill and insight 
into the guerilla’s art, he should not be able to put them in practice owing to the lack of 
materials. Whatever the reason, one thing is clear that, more than once, Tatiahad during his 
wonderful career as a general to leave the field through panic and fear striking his ranks; 
while Kumar Singh, like his prototype, the great Mahratta Shivaji, never allowed his army to 
become diffident, but created in them absolute confidence in themselves as well as in himself, 
their leader, by his personal valor and intrepidity and discipline; and he, also, exhibited 
matchless skill both in giving battle and in avoiding it – in both the positive and the negative 
sides of guerilla warfare; into dust, in the midst of a proud victory, on an independent throne, 
and under the banner of freedom – the old, the brave, the great Indian could die an 
honourable death! 
324 
On the 26th of April,1858, Kumar Singh died. No sooner did this actor pass off from the stage 
than another – equally brave, equally noble, and equally patriotic – appeared on the scene. 
This new general was no other than the younder brother of Kumar Singh. Raja Amar Singh, 
without allowing a moment’s slackening in the vigour of the war, without taking a rest of 
even four days, marched straight on the knock at the gates of Arrah itself! Having heard of 
the defeat of Le Grand of Arrah, the British forces which had stopped on the other side of the 
Ganges had by this time crossed it; and the two generals, Brigadier Douglas and general Lugard, marched on Raja Amar Singh on the 3rd of May. At Bihiya, Hatampur, Dalilpur, and 
several other places, each alternate day, the English forces attacked the Revolutionaries. 
Therefore, now Amar Singh resorted to different tactics. If he saw that the enemy was 
gaining the upper hand, he would order his forces to divide themselves into small bands, to 
retire in divers but well-mapped-our directions and, thus rendering pursuit by the enemy 
hopelessly impossible, to get united again at the appointment signal. How, now, to fight with 
this invisible army – was the chief question before the British. Every battle seemed to them 
quite decisive, but the very next moment the army of Amar Singh was as strong and as active 
at some other place as ever! No sooner he was driven from one end of the jungle then he 
appeared again in the second, and as soon as he was driven from that, he would wheel round 
and reign supreme in the first. At last, worn out, disgraced, and disappointed – the British general, Lugard, resigned on the 15th of June and returned to England to rest. His army, too 
left the field and entered the camp. 
And this was the signal for Amar Singh to reunite his bands and to appear on the battle-field 
with the pomp of a victorious general. Now the police of Gaya were won over to fight for the 
freedom of the nation. Then, sending the English forces on a wrong scent, Amar Singh 
attacked Arrah itself and entered it. Nay, now he is actually entering back into that capital of 
Jagadishpur. July passed; August and September also passed; - yet the banner of a free people 
was flashing forth from the towers of Jagadishpur and the Rana Amar Singh was reigning the 
beloved monarch of a liberated people! Brigadier Douglas and his seven thousand English 
forces were sworn to finish him. Nay, they had even offered prizes to anyone who would 
bring the head of Amar Singh by hook or crook. They had, by this time, cleared the jungles 
and made roads; from post to post, the British bands were constantly advancing; but nothing 
availed against the worthy successor of Kumar Singh. It was not possible for want of space to 
enumerate his different activities. Suffice it to say that the Rana Amar Singh fought in such a 
manner as to make his whole people think that Kumar Singh died not at all! 
325 
At last, the English decided to end the whole campaign by a supreme effort and seven 
different armies advanced from seven different directions on Jagadishpur. All the roads 
leading to Jagadishpur were thus closed up and the Rana was caught as if in a trap. The cordon slowly began to close round Amar Singh and, at last, on the 17th of October, it 
tightened its grip on the capital itself. Alas! It is in this net that the liberty-loving lion is to be 
captured and killed! At the appointed time, all these forces rushed simultaneously from all 
directions into Jagadishpur and the helpless lion was hit – but, well done, Amar Singh, well 
done! It was the cage that was hit, and the lion had already escaped all unscatched! 
For, though six divisions had advanced and fallen on the town as ordered, yet the seventh one 
was late by five hours and the shrewd Amar Singh, with all his forces, vanished by his very 
side, taking full advantage of the delay of that division of the foe. 
Therefore, abandoning the plan which had proved so ineffectual as regards the crushing of 
the Behar Revolutionaries, the English government sent a division of mounted infantry to 
pursue them. This ever-increasing and ever-pursuing force of the enemy left not one moment 
of rest to Amar Singh. The new rifles that were introduced into the enemy’s camp at this time 
had made the matchlocks of the Revolutionary forces almost useless, and the infantry found it 
impossible to outrun the horsemen’s pursuit. Still, Amar Singh talked not of surrender! On the 19th of October the English forces shut up the Revolutionaries, first in the village of 
Nonadi and, out of four hundred of them, they cut off three hundred! The remaining one 
hundred dashed out desperately into the field outside, like infuriated tigers, and fought a 
bloody battle with the new division of British forces that had just arrived. It was found in the 
end that out of these only three escaped – and one out of the three was the Rana Amar Singh 
who had been fightting all the while incognito. Many were the bloody encounters and many 
the pools of blood through which the Panday army had to swim across. But, still, the flag of 
liberty was unbent! So narrow were theior escapes that, once, the very elephant of the Rana 
was captured; but the Rana jumped off from it and vanished. In this way, the Revolutionaries 
contested every inch of their ground, while being pressed onwards and onwards out of their 
province; and now they had reached the hills of Kaimur, for “the whole population of the district constantly and systematically misled the British pursuers by false information.”9 
With this sympathy of the populace, the patriotic chief entered the Kaimur hills but was soon 
followed by the relentless foe pursuing in his track. Still there was no talk of surrender. Every 
hill and every dale, every hillock and every rock, fought on with the alien till the whole of the 
326 
Panday army died fighting for the liberty of the land, for the honour of their Dharma! Died 
fighting, yes, for not only the men but even the women of that patriotic band did not return 
back to their homes as captives and slaves! The hundred and fifty ladies of the Royal palace 
of Raja Shrimant Kumar Singh, seeing that no hope or chance of success remained to them in 
this world, stood before the guns, set fire to the fuse with their own hands, and got themselves 
blown up into the – Immortality of Martyrdom! 
Thus fought Behar for its birthrights against the foreign foe! 
But Rana Amar Singh did not fall into the hands of the enemy. Fortune left him, but his 
unconquerable soul could never! But what became of him? – Where did he end his days? 
Bewildered History echoes back, ‘where?’ 
9. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 344. 
CHAPTER-IX MOULVIE AHMAD SHAH 
AFTER the fall of Lucknow, there remained no powerful nucleus to concentrate the forces of 
the Revolutionaries in the provinces of Rohilkhand and Oudh. The tide of British conquest 
that has been sweeping over the Doab and Behar had driven all the Revolutionaries from 
these provinces into the ever-narrowing circle of Oudh and Rohilkhand. By this irresistible 
pressure on all sides and by want of powerful stronghold, the Revolutionaries had to give up 
the old system of open warfare and pitched battles and to take to guerilla tactics. Had they 
done so at the very start, the chances of success had been over whelmingly innumerable. But, 
327 
better late than never! For, though success was rendered extremely difficult, yet there was not 
the least suggestion in the Revolutionary camp of surrender or desertion. So, the leaders of 
Oudh and Rohilkhand decided to continue the War of Independence by pursuing guerilla 
tactics, and issued the following Proclamation and military order all over the provinces: “Do 
not attempt to meet the regular columns of the infidels in open battle, because they are 
superior to you in discipline and they have big guns. But watch their movements, guard all 
the Ghats on the rivers, intercept their communications, stop their supplies, cut up their daks and posts, and keep constantly hanging about their camp. Give the Feringhi no rest!”1 
Moulvie Ahmad Shah at once began to put into execution these orders. He began to hand 
about the camp of the British forces which were at Lucknow and camped at Bari, a place 
twenty-nine miles away from the English camp. The Begum Hazrat Mahal was encamped at 
Bitaoli with six thousand men. In order to break both these forces, Hope Grant started from 
Lucknow with a strong force of three thousand soldiers and a powerful artillery, first in the 
direction of Bari. The next day brought with it an incident which showed the wonderful 
courage and cleverness of the Revolutionary scouts. The Moulvie had sent out some of his 
scouts to get correct information about the British force. On the same night they entered the 
camp of the English with perfect nonchalance. The English watchmen stopped them and asked, “Who goes there?” “We are the men of the 12th regiment!” was the answer. This 
1. Russel says: “This general order bears marks of sagacity and points out the most 
formidable war we would encounter.” – Diary, page 276. answer was literally true, for all of them had indeed belonged to the 12th regiment. But how were the poor watchmen to know that this 12th regiment was one of those which rose in 
rebellion as far back as the July of the previous year and had killed their English officer? The 
steady and firm step of these men, that resolute answer, and that fearless simplicity of 
behaviour drove away all suspicion about them, and the watchmen replied “Alright!” The 
daring band entered unopposed into the English camp, obtained all the information that they 
wanted, and came out all unscathed to report it to their master! 
Having thus informed himself of the exact situation and the plan of the British camp, the 
Moulvie quickly formed his plans, marches ahead, and took possession of a village four miles 
from Bari. The plan of the Moulvie was that, while his infantry should hold this village 
against the enemy, his cavalry should march ahead by a secret route and should wheel round 
328 
and attack the rear of the British forces. He knew it for certain that the next morning the 
British general was coming to that very place, suspecting no harm and in a perfect sense of 
security. As soon as this unwary prey came into the trap, the Moulvie’s infantry was to attack 
him from the front, while his cavalry was to fall on the enemy’s flanks or rear. Malleson says: 
“It was realy a brilliant idea and did credit to his tactical skill.” 
There were two things most necessary for the success of this brilliant design. The one thing 
was to keep perfect secrecy about the fources of the Moulview in the village; and the other 
was that the cavalry that was to make a flank attach should not sally forth and put the enemy 
on his guard before the front attack should be begun. The Moulvie did whatever he had to do. 
He sent his cavalry from Bari that same night by the route agreed on; he quietly took 
possession of the village and succeeded in concealing himself there, and so cleverly that the 
next morning actually saw the unsuspecting British general approaching the banks of the 
river. Half an hour more and the British forces would be done for! 
But in that half an hour, the splendid plan of the Moulvie was shattered to pieces by the 
impetuosity of the cavalry men. They had already occupied a very convenient place on the 
flank of the British forces and had been holding themselves ready to pounce upon the foe. 
But their leader, while lying in ambush, saw some guns unprotected in front of them and, 
forgetting the strict orders of the Moulvie, made for them with the intention of capturing 
them, and even captured and obtained possession of them for a while; but soon, the English 
woke to their danger, the guns were recaptured, and the whole plan of the Moulvie was 
shattered. For, this fighting at the rear opened the languid eyes of the English commander and 
he saw the danger in his rear as well as his front. Seeing his plan thus nullified by the 
rashness of his cavalry, the Moulvie who was holding the village left it after a skirmish and 
marched off – to find another opportunity and to mature another design. 
While Hope Grant was pressing the Revolutionaries upwards and upwards, from Bari to Bitaoli, with a view to drive them out of Oudh, there on the other side, on the 15th April, was 
being fought a hotly contested battle, near the fort of Ruiya. We have seen how, sometime 
before this, in the province of the Doab, the English army, being divided into separate 
divisions and marching by separate routes, pressed on the Revolutionaries simultaneously and 
systematically, sweeping off the whole province, till they drove them all into the town of 
Fatehgarh. In the same manner, a campaign had been organised and put into execution to 
sweep the Revolutionaries off the whole province of Oudh, by different British forces, from 
329 
all possible quarters, pressing them onwards and upwards towards the northern frontier of Oudh. About the 1st of April, 1858, the total number of the white forces in India had risen to 
ninety-six thousand soldiers, besides which there were the loyal armies of the Sikhs. The 
brigades consisting of the Pathans, Pariahs, and other raw recruits, though originally raised in 
haste, had by this time become quite like veterans through constant experience on the field. 
Again, the ‘contingent’ forces of the native princes which had been sent forth to the 
assistance of the English, were also busy in the field. The pick of these innumerable brown 
and white troops were now engaged in the supreme effort of reconquering Oudh. As 
described in the last chapter, Lugard and Douglas were sent into Behar, Sir Hope Grant was 
sent towards Bari and Bitaoli, and Walpole was ordered to march up from the banks of the 
Ganges. Thus, these different forces, including those of the commander-in-chief and others, 
marching in the line to drive out the Revolutionaries to a man further and further to the north 
till they were pushed into Rohilkhand; and then, the idea was to annihilate them by one supreme effort. With this intention, Walpole too had started to do his own part on the 9th of April, 1858; and now, on the 15th of April, he was busy in attacking the fort of Ruiya which is 
fifty-one miles from Lucknow. 
It was not that either the fort of Ruiya was very strong or that its owner Narapat Singh was a 
very big and mighty chieftain. But small Zemindar though he was, ever since this great 
sacrificial fire was lighted up on the field of liberty, this Narapat Singh had offered himself with his all-in-all, as a willing victim for the regeneration of his nation. The 15th of April saw 
a mighty English army, armed with the most modern artillery, attacking this little chief in his 
tiny fort. As he had not even two hundred and fifty men with him in the forst, the English 
naturally expected that the chief must have already evacuated the place. But, on that very 
morning, one of the white prisoners whom Narapat Singh had released came to the English 
camp and informed the general that he had heard Narapat Singh say that he would evacuate 
the fort but not until he had had his vengeance. – Not until a gory fight is fought, not until one 
bloody defeat is inflicted will Narapat leave his fort! 
What! This little chief is to inflict a bloody defeat? And then alone is he to evacuate the fort? 
Walpole was furious and ordered his men to attack the fort. The English forces, as usual, 
circulated a rumour that the forces of Narapat Singh numbered about two thousand! When we 
are sure of crushing this Narapat Singn, what other way of magnifying our sure victory than 
of exaggerating the strength of the adversary? So even Walpole agreed that the forces with 
Narapat must be at least a thousand and five hundred. This released English captive who 
330 attests to the fact of only two hundred and fifty men defending the fort, though an eye- 
witness, might be a mad man! The English forces advanced – and that too, not on the weak 
side of the fort though its weakness was well-known to them, but the brave general would 
insist on marching against the strongest face of the fort! The defenders of the fort began to 
pour a shower of bullets as soon as they saw the British attacking the fort from among the 
trees in front of it. The shower grew hottest when the enemy approacdhed the ditch. Out of a 
hundred and fifty who marched, forty-six English soldiers were killed on the spot. Grove 
could not move one step forward on account of the fire of the Pandays. Now then, the skilful 
Walpole, seeing this crisis at the strong face of the fort, took his guns and rushed against the 
weak side of it; and with such accuracy he aimed his guns, that the English cannon balls sent 
from this side crossed over the fort and fell right amidst the English forces on the other side! 
Many are the generals who fight with their enemies, but matchless and the first without a 
second is General Walpole, who would fight with both friend and foe with equal skill and 
bravery! At the sight of this matchless skill of the veteran general, another general, Hope, 
came forth to save the day – but alas! he is killed by the unbearable fire of the 
Revolutionaries. Even grove is retiring – confusion worse confounded! The confused British 
army left the field and fell back, disgracefully repulsed! 
The death of this brave general, Hope, came as a shock over all Englishmen resident in India. 
Lord Canning and Sir Colin, why, all English was overwhelmed with grief. Not even the 
death of hundreds of soldiers would have inflicted such a sorrow and mourning on the 
English nation as did the death of this Hope – one of the bravest and most energetic of the 
English officers of that period. The tiny chieftain, Narapat Singh, had done what he said, “he 
had his vengeance”, and then left the fort with his handful of men, and went on fighting with 
the unsullied banner of liberty in his hand! 
After these different divisions had swept off the Revolutionaries from the province of Oudh 
towards the north and then to Rohilkhand, the commander-in-chief got all the forces united 
and marched on to Rohilkhand in person. All the leaders of the Revolutionaries had now 
assembledin Shahjahanpur. There was Nana Sahib of Cawnpore and Moulvie Ahmad Shah. 
These two men had baffled all the innumerable attempts of the British generals to get hold of 
them and were still as energetic and unconquered as ever. So, when the news was brought to 
Sir Colin that these two leaders of the Revolutionaries were within his reach in the same 
place and perhaps ignorant of his movements, Sir Colin formed the shrewd plan of closing 
the town from all sides. He marched and closed on Shahjahanpur – but only to find that the 
331 
birds had flown away! It was but natural that Sir Colin should be extremely piqued at this, as 
he had ordered four different forces to guard all the four sides, and the Revolutionary leaders 
escaped by the side guarded by the commander-in-shief himself! 
Now that the plan of Shahjahanpur was frustrated, Sir Colin was desirous of reducing at least 
the city of Bareilly. So, leaving a division of his forces with four guns in Shahjahanpur, he started and arrived on the 14th of May within a day’s distance of Bareilly. The Rohilla, Khan 
Bahadur Khan was still holding out in this city. After the fall of Delhi and Lucknow, the 
Revolutionaries had been pouring into this still independent town of their party. Mirza Feroz 
Shah, the brave prince of the Delhi dynasty, Shrimant Nana Sahib, Moulvie Ahmad Shah, 
Shrimant Bala Sahib, Begum Hazrat Mahal, Raja Teja Singh, and many of the lesser leaders, 
had retreated into Rohilkhand and Bareilly, its capital, where still was waving the flat of a 
free people. And it was for this very reason that Sir Colin had vowed vengeance against this 
city. But in the Indian Camp there was no talk of making any stand at the city itself, as the 
leaders of the Revolution had determined, even according to the general order they had just 
issued, to resist the enemy by guerilla tactics. Their plan was to evacuate the city and get 
scattered all over the fields of Rohilkhand. All preparations had been made for leaving the 
city and only the last order of evacuation remained to be given. But when the brave Rohillas 
actually saw the hated Feringhi just near the town, the majority of them refused to evacuate 
the city without first tasting the steel of the foe – until, once at least, they had given proof of 
their readiness to die for the cause of their nation and their faith. 
The English forces that had surrounded that city were exceedingly strong. Their artillery was 
well-equipped and they had numerous guns; their cavalry and their infantry were well-armed 
and well-disciplined; and the command was in the hands of no less a general than the 
commander-in-chief Sir Colin Campbell himself. Against these, the guns of Khan Bahadur Khan could make no impression, and so, on that 5th of May, the Revolutionary guns had to be 
silent and the Revolutionary sword flashed forth. The sword belonged to the martyr-spirits 
who, in spite of the hopelessness of success, nay, in virtue of the hopelessness of success, 
instead of leaving the battle-field, preferred to embrace death with a smile on their lips and 
the unconquered and unconquerable faith in the holiness of their cause in their heart. To die 
while fighting in a good cause is the key to the gates of Heaven, that was their belief; and 
they knew that the cause of the freedom of a prople was one of the best causes for the sake of 
which one could lay down one’s life. So they unsheathered their swords and dashed like 
thunderbolt on the English forces. With green turbans on their head, with a Kummerbund 
332 
girded round their loins, and a silver ring inscribed with chosen sentences of the Koran in 
their finger, these terrible-looking Ghazis rushed up from the right, holding their head behind 
their shields, with their swords shining aloft in the sun, and shouting wildly their war-cry of 
“Din,Din!” They closed with the British troops with a tremendous shock, and, at this 
desperate attack, though they were very few, the British soldiers were startled and confused and swept away; the 42nd Highlanders tried to check their onrush – but the death-dealiong 
Ghazis still advanced, while some of them even succeeded in reaching to the rear of the 
British forces! Not one of them returned back – all of them fell while fighting and mowed 
down the English soldiery like sheaves before the scythe! They fell; they like lions, despising 
even the thought of retreat or surrender; one only fell without being byoneted by the enemy. 
Why? Wait a minute and the answer comes; for, there is coming up to this spot the 
Commander-in-Chief of the British forces; nay, he has come here! And just then this martyr, 
who had been pretending death, jumps up from among the corpses and falls on the 
commander, but alas! a loyal Sikh standing by the commander scents this danger and cuts the 
Ghazi off!2 
Of the few instances of the immortal bravery of martyrdom in the history of the worls, none 
can be greater than this! 
2. Russel’s Diary. 
Next day, having baffled the attack of the British to capture them, the Revolutionaries, with Khan Bahadue Khan at their head, marched out of Bareilly on the 7th of May, 1858, and the 
English forces took possession of the evacuated capital of Rohilkhand. 
Disappointed on account of the safe escape of Khan Bahadur Khan out of his clutches, but 
still feeling triumphant for the capture of Bareilly, Sir Colin was standing in his mighty camp. 
Just then, there rose one deafening cry all over the camp – the cry of “The Moulvie! The 
Moulvie!! The Moulvie, again!!!” 
It was an extremely surprising design that the Moulvie was hatching there at the town of 
Shahjahanpur. Having baffled Sir Colin, it was not simply to avoid a fight that Nana Sahib 
and the Moulvie had left Shahjahanpur. All the government buildings in the town had been 
demolished by the order of Nana Sahib even before they left the town. The keen-sighted 
333 
leaders had rightly gussed that the English commander would leave only a few troops in 
Shahjahanpur, and would proceed to Bareilly; and they had decided that, when he was thus 
away, the Moulvie should wheel round and fall on the city, crush the English forces there, 
and thus avenge the loss of Bareilly by the sack of Shahjahanpur. This was their plan and all 
things turned up as they guessed. For the British commander did go to Bareilly, leaving only 
a small detachment, though with a strong complement of artillery composed of four field- 
pieces. And the English detachment had to encamp on a plain, unprotected and open, as Nana Sahib had already caused all fortified places to be pulled down. On the 22nd of May, Moulvie 
Ahmad Shah started for Shahjahanpur by rapid marches, while his prey was indulging in 
false security. But, after midnight, the forces of the Moulvie – none can say by whose foolish 
obstinacy – stopped for a while within four miles of the town. This stay made the excellent 
plan barren of fruits, as “native spies employed by the British were on the alert, and one of 
them flew with the intelligence of his dangerous vicinity to Colonel Hale at Shahjahanpur.” 
As soon as this traitorous spy brought the news, the British commander moved into the 
newly-built fortified position with his soldiers. The Moulvie pressed on, though now his prey 
was awake and occupying a strong position. He attacked and occupied the town, captured the 
fort, and levied a tax on the rich inhabitants of the place for the supplies of his forces. Even 
Malleson admits that, “in acting thus, he simply conformed to the custom of war in Europe.” 
Not only this; but in a war of independence, when a handful of noble spirits offer their fresh 
blood to wipe off the shame and slavery of a whole nation, it is the duty of the people to 
support them voluntarily. After taking possession of the town the Moulvie brought eight 
guns, and began a cannonade on the fortified place where his foe was under shelter. When this news reacher Sir Colin at Bareilly on the 7th of May though he was surprised, his 
joy knew no bounds. The lost opportunity, which had worried the Commander-in-Chief so 
much ever since the escape of the Moulvie some days before, seemed now about to be 
restored by the action of the Moulvie himself. And therefore, taking the utmost precaution 
possible, Sir Colin started by forced marches to pounce upon his prey. Now, it was clear that 
there was no loop-hole whatsoever left through which the Moulvie Ahmad Shah could escape. From the 11th of May, for three days there was a continuous fight. It was, indeed, 
impossible for the Moulvie to escape. So, from all sides the different Revolutionary leaders 
brought all their forces together, in order to save this most popular and most energetic of 
patriots. The Begum of Ayodhya, Mayyan Sahib, the King of Mahmadi, the Prince Feroze 
Shah of Delhi, Nana Sahib of Cawnpore – all these leaders poured in with their forces, before the 15th of May, to help the flag of liberty, now in such immediate danger in Shahjahanpur. 
Thus reinforced, the Moulvie marched out of Shahjahanpur, warring night and day with his 
334 
now discomfited foe, and again escaped the coils that the commander-in-chief had prepared 
for him. So sure was Sir Colin of capturing the Moulvie that, in view of the certainty of the 
ruin of the Revolutionary party at Shahjahanpur, he had already issued orders for dividing his 
forces again and sending them to different directions. And, having dashed to pieces these 
orders and hopes of the enemy, where did the Moulvie go? He entered Oudh – the very 
province which the English had, after a year’s trouble and bloodshed and with the greatest 
difficulty, succeeded in sweeping clear of the Revolutionaries. Sir Colin conquered Ayodhya 
– the Moulvie occupied Rohilkhand; now, Sir Colin comes and conquers Rohilkhand – the 
Moulvie wheels back and again occupies Oudh! 
In such a dogged manner and with such bravery did the Moulvie fight with the foreign foe. 
The British power is now bent on crushing him and putting an end to his dangerous activities. 
Is there anyone who would assist them in this plight? Whose sword is mighty enough to kill 
this powerful headof the Revolution, whom the sword of Sir Colin has proved too blunt to 
cut? What is the best way to accomplish this end? 
What is the best way? There need not be any such anxiety in the English camp. Is it not true 
that the British sword had, many a time before the present, proved equally helpless and 
unsuccessful in eradicating the enemies of British power in India? Well then, those who 
could and did save England in all those periods of danger and despair would come forward to 
save her once more. If the English sword is too blunt to cut to pieces this Indian patriot, let 
the dagger of treachery accomplish the task! 
After the re-entry into Oudh, while trying to offer as much and as dogged a resistance to the 
foreigner as he could, the Moulvie thought it would be a great help to the new storm that he 
was preparing to raise in Oudh if the Raja of Powen would lend the little might he possessed 
to drive out the alien from the land. With this purpose, he sent a request sealed with the Royal 
seal of the Begum to this Raja at Powen. This tiny Raja was quite shocked at the mere 
mention of war and battlefield. Yet, as treacherous as he was cowardly, he wrote back that he 
would like to see the Moulvie personally. In answer to this invitation, the Moulvie started to 
see this Raja. But, to the Moulvie’s great surprise, he foud the gates of the town closed and 
the walls of it guarded by armed men; and in the midst of them, he found standing the Raja 
Jagannath Singh himself, with his brother by his side. Though the Moulvie knew the meaning 
of this sight, still undaunted, he began to hold a parley with the Raja. The wretch on the walls 
335 
of the town was naturally the last man to appreciate his eloquence. When it became clear that 
the crowd was not going to open the gates willingly, the Moulvie ordered his Mahut to goad 
on the elephant on which he was sitting to break upon the gates of the fort. One stroke more 
of the mighty animal’s head – and the gates would have been forced. But, the brother of the 
Raja took aim and Moulvie Ahmad Shah was shot deat by the hand of that wretched coward! 
The fat Raja and his brother at once came out of the gate, severed the head of the Moulvie 
from his body and, covering it up in a cloth, ran forth to the nearest British Thana, thirteen 
miles from the place, - to the city of Shahjahanpur. Here the British officers were at their 
table in the dining-room. The Raja came in, unpacked the burden which he had held forth as a 
trophy, and let roll on the ground, by the feet of the officers, the head of the Moulvie still 
gushing with blood! Next day, the civilised Britishers hung on the kotawali the head of an 
enemy who had fought against them so bravely and so honouraly, and the fact brute of Powen 
was rewarded with fifty thousand Rupees for this, his nefarious act of treachery! 
As soon as the news of his death reached England, the relieved Englishmen felt that “ the most formidable enemy of the British in Noprthern India was no more!”3 In person, the 
3. Hlome’s History of the Indian Mutiny, page 539. 
Moulvie was tall, lean and muscular, with large deep-set eyes, bettle brows, a high aquiline 
nose, and lantern jaws. The life of this brave Mahomedan shows that a rational faith in the 
doctrines of Islam is in no way inconsistent with, or antagonistic to, a deep and all - powerful 
love of the Indian soil; and that the true believer in Islam will feel it a pride to belong to, and 
privilege to die for, his mother-country! Even the English historian Malleson, in no way 
inclined to assess rightly – far less to exaggerate – the virtues of the Revolutionist leaders, is 
carried off by his inner feelings and, forgetting for the moment that he is an Englishman, 
remarks: “The Moulvie was a very remarkable man.... Of his capacity as a military leader 
many proofs were given during the revolt, but none more decisive than those recorded in this 
chapter. No other man could boast that he had twice foiled Sir Colin Campbell in the field! 
.... Thus dies the Moulvie Ahmand’allah (sic) of Fyzabad. If a patriot is a man who plots and 
fights for the independence, wrongfully destroyed, of his native country, then most certainly 
the Moulvie was a true patriot. He had not stained his sword by assassination; he had 
connived at no murders; he had fought manfully, honourably, and stubbornly in the field 
336 
against the strangers who had seized his country; and his memory is entitled to the respect of the brave and true-hearted of all nations.”4 
4. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. IV, page 381. 
CHAPTER-X RANI LAKSHMI BAI 
GIVE up my Jhansi? I will not. Let him try to take who dares!” With this challenge the heroic 
Ranee of Jhansi rose against the British and as it is recorded in previous parts of this History 
she assumed the leadership of the Revolution, drove the English and began to rule at Jhansi 
as the Queen of the province. The forces of the Revolution had wreaked a bloody vengeance 
on the English people and army and left not a trace of their rule at Sagar. Naogaon, Banda, 
Banapur, Shahgarh and Karki. The people everywhere hailed the Queen as their own. She 
then busied herself – in restoring order and peace in her liberated province. 
337 
The Ranee’s daily life at this period has been described as follows :- “The Bai got up at five 
in the morning and took a bath with fragrant attar. After dressing – and she generally wore a 
Chanderi Saree of faultless white – she would sit for her daily prayers. First, she dropped the 
necessary water as a prayaschitta for keeping hair on her head after her husband’s death; 
then, she used to worship the Tulsi in the Tulsi grove. Then began the Parthiva Puja at which 
the Durbar musicians would sing in choir. Puraniks would then start reading the Puran. 
Then, Sirdars and dependants came and she returned their usual salutes. Being very keen of 
memory, even if a single man among the seven hundred and fifty who paid their respects to 
her in the morning was not present, the very next day, the Bai would not fail to inquire why 
he did not come the previous day. After the worship of God began the dinner. After dinner, 
she would take an hour’s siesta unless there was urgent work to do. Then she would order the 
presents of the morning to be brought before her, which was done on silver trays covered 
over with silk cloths. Those things that she liked, she accepted; the others were given over to 
the Kothiwalla (minister of the presents department) for distribution amongst her servants. At 
three she went to the Durbar, when she usually put on male attire. She wore a pyjama, a coat 
of dark blue, a cap on the heat, and a beautiful turban on the top of it, a dupeta of 
embroidered cloth round the slender waist, and the sword decked with gems by her side. 
Attired in this wise, this fair woman looked like Gauri herself. Sometimes, she wore the 
female dress. After her husband’s death, she never wore nath or similar ornaments. Her hands 
had round them bangles of diamond; she wore a small necklace of pearls round her neck and 
a diamond ring on her little finger. These were the only jewels worn by the Bai Sahib. Her 
hair was gathered up together behind. She wore a white saree and a plain white bodice. Thus, 
sometimes in male attire and sometimes in female, the Bai Sahib used to honour the Durbar 
by her presence. Those assembled in Durbar never used to see her person. For the room in 
which she sat was separate from, and only opened into, the Durbar hall. Gold carving adorned 
the doors, and over these fell gracefully the chintz curtain, embroidered with gold cloths. In 
this room sat the Bai Sahib on a gadi of soft down, leaning on a soft pillow. Outside the door, 
two pages with maces of silver and sold always attended. Opposite the room, Lakshman Rao 
Dewanji stood with a bundle of important documents in his hand, and beyond him sat the 
Registrars of the Durbar. Being very keen and intelligent, the Bai quickly grasped every 
matter brought before her, and her orders were clear and definite and to the point. Sometimes 
she wrote her orders out herself. She was very careful in affairs of justice, and decided civil 
and criminal cases alike with great ability. Ranee Sahib worshipped Mahalakshmi devoutly. 
The temple of that Goddess was situated on the banks of a lake filled with lotus flowers, and 
every Friday and Tuesday the Bai visited the temple. One day, it so happened that after the 
338 
Bai had returned from the temple and was passing through the south gate, she was thousands 
of beggars blocking the passage and creating a disturbance. So, she inquired of the Minister, 
Lakshman Rao Pande, the reason of this. He inquired and informed her that the people were 
very poor, and that they suffered immensely on account of excessive cold, and that, therefore, 
they requested that the Bai would kindly consider their condition. The Bai left very grieved 
for these poor people, and she at once issued orders – kind-hearted that she was – that, on the 
fourth day from thence, a gathering of beggars should take place, where every one should be 
provided with a thick coat and a cap and a blanket either white or black. The very next day, 
all the tailors of the town were given orders to make caps and coats. On the day appointed it 
was proclaimed that all the beggars were to gather in front of the palace. Poor people, too, 
had been included in his gathering. All were given clothes by the Bai and they went away 
satisfied....... In the fight with Nathe Khan when the wounded men were brought into the 
city, the Bai herself would insist on being present when their wounds were being dressed. Her 
very presence soothed their pain, and they felt themselves sufficiently rewarded by the kind 
and sympathetic interest she took in their well-being. The Ranee grieved at their grief, gave 
them ornaments and medals, patted them, and showed such sympathy that others, instead of 
being disheartened at the sight of these wounded soldiers, felt that they could even give up 
their lives for the sake of the Ranee. The grandeur of the Bai’s processions passes 
description. On the occassions of the visits to the temple of Mahalakshmi, she started 
sometimes in a palanquin, and sometimes on horseback. When in the palanquin, the 
palanquin would be covered with curtains of gold and embroidered cloths tied with golden 
ribbon. When she was on horseback, in male attire, the end of a thin and beautiful batti 
floated on her back and it fitted her admirably. The national flag of freedom was carried 
before her, with the band playing military music. Two hundred Europeans followed the flag 
and a hundred horsemen rode before and behind her. With the palanquin came the karbharis, 
ministers, feudatories, and other officers like Bhayya Sahib Upasane; and others either rode 
or followed on foot. Sometimes troops accompanied the procession. When the Bai started 
from the palace, the choughada on the fort made sweet music. The choughada of the nagarkhana of Mahalakshmi started at the same time.”1 
And thus, from the Vindhyas to the Jumna, there was not a vestige of British authority left, 
Brahmins, Moulvies, Sirdars, Dorkdars, Sepoys, the police, Rajas, Raos, bankers, villagers – 
all were desirous fighting for only one thing, and that was Independence! And to unite 
together these thousand voices in one harmonious whole, the Lakshmi of Jhansi declared with 
her sweet but firm voice “None can have my Jhansi; he who dares may try!” 
339 
Very rarely had the world heard such a firm “No!” Generous and liberal to a fault India has 
always been pronouncing and swearing by “I shall give!”, “I shall give!”, so far. But here was 
a strange phenomenon to-day – a set face and a stern voice which said, “I will not give! I will 
not give up my Jhansi!” Would to heaven, O Mother, that every one of thy sons and 
daughters had said the same! The Feringhi was taken aback at this unexpected assertion; and 
Sir Hugh Rose was sent, with five thousand armed men and a considerable number of guns, 
to gauge the extent of the disturbance and to quell it. 
In the beginning of 1858, the English had drawn up a complete military plan for the 
reconquest of all the territory, from the Himalayas to the Vindhyas, which was under the 
Revolutionaries. The whole territory was divided into two portions, and to each of them a 
huge army was sent to subdue it. We have in an earlier chapter described how commander-in- 
chief Sir Colin Campbell marched upwards from Allahabad to the north of the Ganges and 
the Jumna and, with his big army, conquered the Doab, and crossed the Ganges and marches 
on Lucknow; how, after destroying Lucknow, he extinguished the flames of insurrection 
ranging in Behar, in Benares and round if, and in Oudh; how he forced all the Revolutionaries 
1. D.B.Parasnis’s Life of Lakshmi Bai, paged 147-151. 
into Rohilkhand, where the final engagement took place, and how, thus, the northern portion 
of the territory which was in the hands of the Revolutionaries was reconquered by the 
English. While Sir Colin was advancing from the north of the Jumna towards the Himalayas, 
Sir Hugh Rose advanced to conquer the southern portion lying between the Jumna and the 
Vindhyas. In the north, the Sikhs, the Gurkhas, and other Indian troops and feudatories had 
joined Sir Colin; so also in the south, Sir Hugh Rose had on his side the help of the princes of 
Hyderabad, Bhopal, and other states. He had, in addition, got the valuable assistance of the 
troops of Madras and Bombay and the Hyderabad contingent. To mention specially that the 
Indian troops had joined Sir Hugh Rose is unnecessary. For, to mention that Sir Hugh Rose 
was successful would imply the first proposition. For the English to obtain a victory, of 
themselves, is as impossible as the most impossible thing in the world. The traitorous Indian 
troops thus collected together for conquering the southern parts were divided into two 
divisions. One was under the command of Brigadier Whitlock who was to start from 
340 Jubbulpore and, subduing the provinces on the way, was eventually to join Sir Hugh Rose. 
The other was under Sir Huge Rose himself. As soon as Whitlock started from Jubbulpore, 
Sir Hugh was also to start from Mhow; he was to advance through Jhansi on Kalpi. According to the plan of campaign, Sir Huge started from Mhow on the 6th of January 1858 
and, after a fight, he captured the fort of Rajgarh. From thence, he advanced to Sagar, 
released the prisoners kept there by the Revolutionaries, advanced further south, reducing various positions of the enemy on the way, captured Banapur on the 10th of March, and reconquered the famous fort of Chanderi. On the 20th of March, the triumphant English army 
encamped about fourteen miles from Jhansi. By these many struggles, bands of 
Revolutionaries distributed all over the country from the banks of the Narbada upwards, now 
crowded into Jhansi; and that is why Sir Hugh advanced with great dispatch on Jhansi to 
reduce this stronghold of the Revolutionaries. But Lord Canning and Sir Colin both issued 
orders to Sir Hugh first to relieve the Raja of Charkhari who was being besieged by Tatia. 
This order, if he obeyed it, would have spoiled Sir Hugh’s plan of reducing Jhansi. What was 
he to do? He could neither disobey nor find his way to obey the orders. As, in these trying 
circumstances, the best interests of the British government lay in advancing on Jhansi, Sir 
Robert Hamilton took upon himself the whole responsibility of disobeying the orders of the 
two highest authorities in Hindusthan; and the British army, emboldened by a high national 
feeling, advanced towards Jhansi, hopeful of victory. But the English army suffered 
enormously as soon as they set foot on the soil of Jhansi. For they found, to their great 
surprise, that all the tract of land surrounding Jhansi had been laid waste by order of the 
Queen in orderthat the enemy should have no supplies of any sort. Not a blade of corn in the 
fields, not a vestige of grass on the meadows, not a tree which could afford shelter; So had 
William of Orange, when there appeared to be a possibility of the Netherlands falling into the 
hands of the Spanish tyrant and invader, ordered that the dykes be opened and the sea let in, 
rather than that the country should fall in the hands of the enemy. And this day Jhansi had 
adopted a similar course. 
The same terrible thunder is in her voice; her eyes are spouting forth the red flames of anger! 
Mardan Singh, Raja of Banapur, the enraged chief of Shahagarh, the brave Thakurs, with 
their lives in their hands, Sirdars of Bundelkhand, resolute as ever, with their many followers 
– all these hot incendiary elements in the interior of Jhansi are burning and flame-red. The 
flames leap up even as the Jaripatka; and look, the central figure of the whole fight is there, 
shining above all! Aye, she is the central idea, the flashing impersonation of Swaraj! She is 
the inspiration, she is the incarnation of Liberty! 
341 
In spite of the barrenness of the country around, the English approached Jhansi. For, thanks to 
the loyalty of the Scindia and the Raja of Tehri, the force was throughout the operations abundantly supplied with grass, firewood, and vegetables.2 As the Scindia and the Raja of 
Tehri are helping the Feringhis, surrounded as you are by treachery and disloyalty, betrayed 
by relations as by strangers, you have not the slightest hope of success. Why not then avoid 
extinction by surrendering to the English? But, surrender? And for the Ranee of Jhansi? 
Dewan Lakshman Rao, Moro Punt Tambe, brave Thakurs and Sirdars, all heroes of Liberty, 
if you surrender, you will be saved; if you fight, you will die. Which will you choose? 
Jhansi answered from her thousand mouths, sternly, in the words of the Scripture, “As 
everyone who is born must die, why sully fair fame uselessly?” 
So, it was determined to give battle to the English for the honour of the country. And Jhansi 
was busy by night and by day preparing for the fight. Brave men, there were many in her 
army; but trained men, there were very few. Want of discipline was very apparent. The queen 
herself, however, let the whole army. On every rampart and every gate, she was moving 
2. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, page 110. 
about actively; she was standing where guns were being planted and moved into position; she 
was budy selecting clever gunners; and she was to be found everywhere inspiring heroism 
even in the coldest hearts. The learned Brahmins of Jhansi were praying for the success of the 
country. Its temples blessed the soldier who went to the field, and tended the wounded who 
returned from battle; its workmen were busy preparing ammunition and other necessary for 
war. The men of Jhansi manned their guns, loaded the muskets; its women carried ammunition, built Top Khanas, supplied provisions.3 When the night of the 23rd fell, sounds 
of battle-drums were heard throughout the town and lighted torches shone forth at frequent intervals from the fort. The guards fired a few shots too. The morning of the 24th approached. 
No more delay now! The Ghanagarj (thunder-clap) gun began its work. The noise made by 
that gun was terrific. 
We shall quote an eye witness’s account of the early stages of the siege. 
342 
“From the 25th, the engagement began in right earnest. The enemy poured in a heavy fire all 
day and night. In the night came cannon-balls on the forst and the city. The sight was terrible 
to see. A cannon-ball of fifty or sixty pounds weight would look as small as a tennis ball but 
red like live charcoal. During the day one would not see these balls clearly for daylight, but in the night, they were clearly visible and gave a weird appearance to the night. On the 26th, at 
midday, the English silenced the guns on the southern gate, and not a man could make a stand 
there. All men in the field were nearly disheartened at this. Then, the gunner on the western 
gate moved the gun round and fired at the enemy; the third shot killed the best gunner in the 
English army, and the English gun was silenced, in its turn. At this, the Bai Sahib was very 
pleased and presented the gunner with a silver anklet. The name of the brave gunner was 
Gulam Ghose Khan. He had displayed similar skill in the engagement with Nathe Khan also. 
“On the fifty or the sixth day, the same sort of engagement took place. For four or five hours, 
the Bai’s guns were working wonders and the English lost heavily. Many of their guns, too, 
were silenced for some time. Then again, the English guns would be more vigorous, and the 
Jhansi troops would be disheartened and their guns silenced. On the seventh day, at sunset, 
3. “The women were seen working in the batteries and carrying ammunition, etc.”- Sir 
Hugh Rose. 
the gun to the left was disabled. None could stand there. The battlement was destroyed owing 
to the enemy’s fire. But in the night, eleven masons were brought under cover of blankets to 
the walls of the fort, and the work was completed before the day dawned. Thus, the 
battlement was repaired, and the English, to their great surprise, found the Jhansi gun in 
working order. At this time, the English were careless. They suffered considerably and their 
guns were disabled for quite a long time. 
“On the morning of the eighth day, the English army went for Shankar Killa. The English had 
very expensive and modern telescopes and, with their aid, they began to pour a heavy fire on 
the reservoir of water within the fort. Of the six or seven who approached near for taking 
water, four were killed: the others ran leaving their vessels there. As they could not get water 
for nearly four hours, even baths and other ordinary functions could not be carried on. Now, 
the gunners on the western and southern gates stopped the guns of the English attacking the 
343 
Shankar Killa, by a continued fire on them. Then it became possible to get water from the 
reservoir for bath and dinner. There was a powder factory in the tamarind grove. As soon as 
two maunds of powder was prepared, it was taken to the sellers to be stocked. A cannon-ball 
fell on the factory, and thirty men and eight women were killed. On the same day, there was a 
great turmoil. There was a terrible fight. The fighters were shouting loudly. There was a 
terrific noise from muskets, and guns firing heavily. Trumpets and bugles were sounding 
everywhere. Dust and smoke filled the air. Many gunners on the ramparts and a number of 
Sepoys were killed. Others were appointed in their place. The Bai Sahib was working very 
hard. She looked to everything, issued the necessary orders, and repaired every point of 
weakness. By this, the men in the army were very much encouraged and fought continually. 
On account of this determined resistance, the English, in spite of all their powder and ammunition, could not enter the fort till the 31st of March.”4 
But pressed as she is by this constant succession of disasters, why is Queen Lakshmi looking 
so earnestly in that particular direction? And see, she is smiling too! Be ready now and fire 
your salutes; let triumphal drums beat loudly; let war-cries rend the air! For there is Tatia 
Tope advancing with his army to aid Jhansi! 
4. D.B.Parasnis’s Life of Lakshmi Bai, pages 187-193. 
Tatia Tope has come with his army to dishearten the English army and to give courage to 
Jhansi. After the defeat of Wyndham at Cawnpore and Sir Colin’s victory, Tatia crossed the 
Ganges and joined Shrimant Nana. Then, leaving Nana, he crossed the Jumna near Kalpi. As 
the Raja of Charkhari refused to help in the war for the country started by the Peshwa, Tatia, 
as representative of the Peshwa, attacked his capital, punished the traitor well, captured 
twenty-four of his guns, and took from him a contribution of three lacs of Rupees. And then 
Tatia turned towards Kalpi. There, he received a letter from Ranee Lakshmi Bai requesting 
him to come to Jhansi and relieve the siege. He sent the note to the Rao Sahib Peshwa, the 
chief in authority; and, as soon as he got the orders, he charged the rear of the English army. 
It is on seeing him that a smile of hope has come to the lips of Lakshmi. These two had 
played together as children in the palace at Brahmavarta, without anyone noticing them 
particularly. To-day they are playing on the battle-field; the one, on the fortifications of 
Jhansi, is standing amidst rings of flaming fire, the other is approaching close to the Betwa, 
344 
with his twenty-two thousand troops. While playing as children, people hardly noticed them; 
to-day, the whole world is looking on their game! 
Tatia had under him, now, the largest number of troops he ever had, and hence the English 
were not a little disconcerted. They would have been completely so in the battle too, handful 
as they were. For, in front of them was the Ranee Lakshmi Bai; behind them was this 
Mahratta tiger, with his twenty-two thousand claws. Why should he not, then, tear Sir Hugh 
to pieces and eat him up? He advanced to do this, but his twenty-two thousand claws seemed 
all of a sudden disabled, they could hardly be lifted. And what could even a tiger do without 
his claws? Alas! A most shameful poltroonish cowardice was exhibited by the Revolutionary 
troops on the river Betwa. The army of Jhansi was to attack the rear, and Tatia was to attack 
the front; the plan was admirable. But the English, with the dash of despair, advanced on 
Tatia and opened fire on Jhansi. This nullified the two attacks of the aggressive party. One 
determined attack, like that of the Mawalas of Shivaji or the select band of Kumar, and 
vultures had fed upon the Union Jack and its followers. But, the English charged straight on 
the enemy. The cowards did not even offer fight, and – was it treachery or terror – not a 
cannon-shot from Jhansi was heard. So, the army and its commander were routed and ran 
away. Plentiful military supplies were captured by the English, Tatia’s guns fell into their 
hands, and one thousand and five hundred of the Revolutionaries were killed in the pursuit. 
Fifteen hundred people killed in the flight! Mad men and fools! Instead of dying the death of 
cowards while fleeing, if you had only attacked Sir Huge Rose, you would have died the 
death of the Ghazis of Bareillyk, you would have destroyed the whole army with Sir Hugh 
Rose, and your name would have lived for ever! Yet God forgive you! If not our respect, you 
deserve at least our sympathy. For, howsoever you died, you died for the liberty of your 
country! May my country learn from your death at least the lesson that soldiers who fly to 
live, die, and that those who fight to die, live! 
And for death was Ranee Lakshmi Bai fighting! Why, then, this hopelessness on the part of 
Sirdars, Thakurs, and Sepoys? For nine days and nine nights, you stood the deadly charge of 
gun-fire in the hope that Tatia Tope would soon come to your aid. When he came, you shouted for delight; by the defeat of Tatia on the 1st of April, not only that joy but the very 
hope of victory is dashed to pieces; and those supplies, to deprive the enemy of which 
thousands of lives had been sacrificed, have fallen with ease into the enemy’s hands. Tatia’s 
ammunition and guns also have fallen into their hands. All this is certainly true. But, why this 
despair? The enemy may render it impossible for you to live victorious, but he cannot deprive 
345 
you of a death of glory. There is nothing to despair for, then! And stop, hear the steady, firm, 
courageous voice of Ranee Lakshmi. 
“It was not relying on the Peshwa that Jhansi fought so long nor does she require his help to 
continue her fight in the future. So far, your bravery have been exhibited by you most 
admirably. I urge to do the same now and to fight with courage and desperation.” 
Aye, fight with desperation, be ready, let the battle-drums beat, and the trumpets sound! Let was-cries rend the air and let big guns thunder forth! The 3rd of April has dawned and the last 
assault of the English on Jhansi has begun. They are coming from all sides and pressing hard. 
Start, then, in right, good, deadly earnest! See how the goddess of war has taken the sword 
and see how she is making her way through the troops. She is moving about with lightning 
rapidity, presenting some with golden bracelets, some with dresses; some she is touching 
with her sacred touch to pat, to some she is offering her sweet smile; others she is 
encouraging with her heroic words. So now! Gulam Ghose Khan and Kuar Khuda Bhaksh, let 
the fire be most deadly! The enemy is storming the main gate and the fortifications, ladders 
have been planted at eight different places. “Har, Har, Mahadev!” From the fort, from 
ramparts, and from houses came a perfect shower of bullets, a constant succession of shots. 
The deep-mouthed cannon are vomiting forth burning red-hot balls. “Maro Feringhiko!” 
Lieutenant Dick and Lieutenant Meiklejohn have mounted the ladders and are calling upon 
their men to follow them. Boom, boom! Instantly, the daring Englishmen fell in the jaws of 
death! Anyone coming behind? Lieutenant Bonus and heroic Lieutenant Fox, you seem 
anxious for death – your desire shall be accomplished; - die, then! Seeing these four heroes 
who had scaled with the greatest difficulty shot down, the ladders trembled. They swayed and 
broke under the weight of the English troops. The English sounded the bugle to retire; the 
army began to go back – it went back, the soldiers concealing themselves behind every stray 
stone!5 
A strong defence was thus offered at the principal gate. But who is giving forth that tragic 
wail near the southern ramparts? May it be that mean treachery had lost the Morcha gate? 
Yes, unfortunately yes; the English have captured the gate, with the air of treachery – so it is 
said – and they have mounted the ramparts, and are advancing rapidly on. There was no other 
thought that day but to kill or be killed! Once within the city, the English gave no quarter and 
streams of blood flowed freely. The English, taking one position after another, massacring, 
firing, destroying – came right up to the palace. As soon as the palace was forced, thousands 
346 
of Rupees were looted, guards were massacred, and buildings were destroyed. At last, alas! 
Jhansi had fallen into the enemy’s hands! 
Standing on the rampartrs, the Ranee looked back for one moment at Jhansi. Before her rose 
the hideous picture of the terrible disaster that had happened near the south gate. The enemy 
had, after all, defiled her Jhansi! Her eyes were ablaze with anger; she was almost mad with 
rage. She took up her sword and, with her small force of a thousand or fifteen hundred men, 
she marched down the fort. The tigress to avenge her cubs runs not so fleetingly. As soon as 
5. “No sooner did we turn into the road leading towards the gate, than the enemy’s 
bugle sounded, and a fire of indescribabl e fierceness opened upon us from the whole line of 
the walls and from the tower of the fort overlooking this site. For a time it appeared like a 
sheet of fire, out of which burst a store of bullets, round shots, and rockets destined for our 
annihilation...... But the fire of the enemy waxed stronger, and amidst the chaos of sounds, 
of volleys of musketry and roaring of cannon, hissing and bursting rockets, stink-pots, 
infernal machines, huge stones, blocks of wood, and trees, all hurled upon our heads, it 
seemed as though Pluto and the Furies had been loosened upon us, carrying death amongst us 
fast. At this instant a bugle sounded on our right for the Europeans to retire.” – Lowe’s 
Central India, page 254. 
she saw the white troops near the southern gate, she rushed for them, and then, “swords 
crossed, the two armies were mixed up before you could count even fifty; swords flourished 
and dealt heard blows. Many Englishmen were killed. The rest ran towards the town and 
began to fire shots from under cover!” By this sight of Feringhi blood, the anger of this Kali 
was a little appeased, and now she saw that it was foolhardy to fight alone so far from the 
fort. But echoes of such daring heroism were now to be heard in every street in the city. Fifty 
stablemen in the palace, while the whole town and the palace itself was bathed in blood shed 
by English swords, refused to give up the stables! “Surrender” was a word not to be found in 
their dictionary. Everyone of these men cut down the enemy as hard as he could, and it was 
only when everyone of them was killed that the paga fell into the enemy’s hands! The 
English had, by now, rendered the whole town desolate. Everyone who fell into their hands, 
from children of five to old men of eighty, were massacred; the whole city was set fire to; 
347 
wailings from the wounded and the dying, and the cries of those who killed, filled the air. A 
huge wail rose from the whole town! 
When the Queen stood on the walls of the fortress (which the enemy had decided to storm 
only the next day on account of its strength), looking at this sad, sad picture, she was smitten 
with grief and tears started to her eyes! The Queen of Jhansi wept! Those beautiful eyes were 
red with weeping! Her Jhansi to be reduced to this! Then she looked up and saw the flag of 
the Feringhi flying over the walls of Jhansi, and a strange fire shone from those weeping 
eyes! All glory to her courage! But why is this messenger running hard towards her? He said, 
“Your Majesty, the pre-eminently brave Sirdar who guarded the chief gate of the fort, Sirdar 
Kuar Khuda Buksh, and Gulam Ghose Khan, the chief gunner of the artillery, have both been 
shot down by the English!” What a blow this to the already afflicted Queen! What a 
succession of disasters this! What is your next plan, then, Queen? Aye, one and one alone! 
She said to the messenger, who was no other than an old Sirdar, “ I have determined to blow 
myself up with the fort, setting fire to the ammunition with my own hands.” With her 
Jaripatka she must be – if not on the throne, at least on the pyre! 
Hearing this, the old Sirdar calmly replied, “Your Majesty, as it is not safe to be in this 
neighbourhood now, your Majesty should leave the fort to-night breaking through the 
enemy’s camp and should join the Peshwa’s forces. If death comes on the way, the conquest 
of heaven by a dip in the sacred waters of the battle-field is always at hand!” Lakshmi said, “I 
should choose to die on the battle-field, but, being a woman, I fear that the enemy might 
insult my person!” To this the whole Durbar answered with one voice: “Insult! So long as 
there is life in the body of the least among us, our sword shall cut to pieces the enemy who 
woulod dare so much as touch your sacred person!” 
Well then, the night had fallen; Lakshmi greeted all her dear subjects and gave them her 
blessings for the last time! Her subjects were full of tears at the thought that she was leaving 
Jhansi, perhaps for ever. She took a selected number of horsemen with her. An elephant with 
jewels on him was placed in the middle and Ranee Lakshmi descended the fort amidst cries 
of “Har, Har, Mahadev!” She put on male apparel; a steel armour covered her person, a 
Jammia was in her girdle; a fine sword hung from her belt, a silver cup was in her Pudder, 
and her adopted child Damodar was on her back, tied in silk Dhoti. Thus accoutred, riding on 
a noble white steed, this queen, Lakshmi, looked like the goddess of war. When the north 
gate came, the sentry who belonged to the traitor army of the Tehri State asked, “Who goes 
348 
there?” “The army of Tehri is going to the aid of Sir Huge Rose,” was the answer. The sentry 
was satisfied and Ranee advanced, evading the English sentry too in a similar manner. One 
maid, one bargeer, and ten or fifteen horsemen formed her body-guard, and marched through 
the camp of the enemy. But her other horsemen were stopped by the English on suspicion and 
had to fight hard. Moro Punt Tambe, wounded though he was, was able to run as far as Datia. 
But the traitor Dewan of that State captured him and gave him over to the English, who later 
on hanged him. 
But, Lakshmi, put your horse now in a gallop. For Lieutenant Bowker is galloping behind, 
followed by select horsemen, in order to capture you. And you, O horse, fortunate on account 
of the sacred treasure you carry, gallop on! Let the men of Bharata be traitors, but, ye 
animals, ye at least be faithful! O Night, drop the curtain of darkness between Queen 
Lakshmi and her enemies ! O horse, fleeting as you are, quicker than the wind, balance 
Lakshmi lightly! Ye paths, do not obstruct the horse’s onward march! O ye stars, shine not 
for the enemy, but just shine so that this tender beauty, delicate as a flower, should be 
encouraged on the way by your rays, cool as nectar! The dawn has now broken; so, heroic 
Queen, flying all night on the wings of the wind, rest thee near the village of Bhandeir. The 
Mahalkuree of the village will feed your darling Damodar. 
As soon as breakfast was over, she again started on her journey on the Kalpi road. But what is 
this dust behind? Spur your horses on! Lakshmi, keep Damodar safe on the back and gallop 
on. Tak our your sword! There, Bowker is pressing close! Here is the reward for your wicked 
pursuit! Dare you hold back the lightning? A long sweep of her sword, and Bowker was 
violently thrown off his horse. A deadly fight took place between her fifteen or twenty 
horsemen and the English pursuers; those who were alive advanced forward to protect 
Lakshmi Bai. Wounded Bowker and his handful of men gave up the pursuit. The sword of the 
Mother advanced triumphant, shining. The sun in the heaven above, Ranee Lakshmi Bai on 
earth – both were marching forward. Morning was gone and mid-day came, but the Ranee did 
not stop. Afternoon came, the shades of evening began to fall, the sun went down the horizon 
– but the Ranee still would not stop. The stars rose. They saw her just as they had seen her the 
night before –marching, marching in hot haste. At last, at midnight, Ranee Lakshmi entered 
Kalpi. A ride of a hundred and two miles she accomplished, and that, fighting with 
Lieutenant Bowker and his soldiers and with the burden of a child on her back. That horse 
just lived, it so seemed, to carry her to Kalpi. For, as soon as he saw the rider safe in Kalpi, he 
fell down on the ground all in a heap. Six men were immediately ordered to attend to the 
349 
horse. The Ranee loved the horse very much. A horse which carried safe such a person with 
such faithfulness deserves to be remembered, and his memory will be loved for all time. 
The Ranee slept till dawn. In the morning, the touching meeting between the Ranee and Shri 
Rao Sahib Peshwa took place. Both remembered their ancestors – the thought that they were 
descended from those who had done such seemingly impossible deeds inspired them both. 
They realised that the flag of the Mahratta empire waved as far as Attock because men like 
the Scindia and the Holkar, the Gaekwar and Bundela and Patwardhan were ready to give up 
their lives for Swaraj. And for that very flag, for that very Swaraj for which their fathers and 
grandfathers had bled, they resolved to continue uninterrupted, to the very last breath of their 
lives, the war already begun against those who attempted to enslave their motherland. 
So, they resolved to carry on the war as vigorously as ever. And again did Lakshmi Bai and 
the brave Tatia Tope begin to make preparations for the coming deadly fight. 
While these arrangements are going on there, we shall take a rapid glance at the activities of 
Brigadier Whitlock whom we had left sometime back. To reconquer the tract between the 
Narbada and the Ganes and the Jumna, two armies had started and, of these, the one under Sir 
Hugh Rose, as we had already seen, had taken Jhansi. When Jhansi was taken, the British 
indulged in a wholesale looting such as Nadir Shah alone had accomplished before, defiling 
of temples and polluting of images, and massacring terribly all alike. That finished, the army 
continued the campaign. The last part of the campaign had been appointed for Brigadier Whitlock to accomplish. Accordingly, Brigadier Whitlock started on the 17th of February 
from Jubbulpore, with all his army – European regiments, Indian regiments from Madras, 
“black” and white cavalry, and splendid artillery. He entered Sagar in triumph, where the 
loyal Raja of Oorcha joined him. The, the English army began to advance on the Nabob of 
Banda, the chief leader of the Revolutionaries in that province. In the beginning of the 
Revolution at Jhansi, Sagar, and other places, cruel massacres had taken place and the 
Europeans from those places ran wherever they could to save their lives. The Nabob had 
brought them to his palace and was looking after them well. But, at the same time, he was as 
busy in trying to throw off the British yoke already tottering through the shocks of the 
Revolution as he was in saving the lives of these Enbglishmen. From the very beginning, the 
symbols of slavery in his kingdom had been smashed and he was runing as an independent 
prince. Seeing the English army coming to deprive him of his liberty, the Nabob, urged and 
aided by the whole populace, was ready for battle. Several engagements took place between 
350 the two parties, but, being defeated in them, the Nabob started for Kalpi with his army, and Whitlock entered Banda in triumph on the 19th of April. The next march was to be on the Rao 
of Kirwi. 
Rao Madhav Rao of Kirwi was a child of ten and his guardianship was in the hands of the 
English. The Rao of Kirwi was a near relation of Baji Rao Peshwa. In 1827, Anant Rao, the 
then ruler of Kirwi, deposited two lakhs of Rupees with the English Government for some 
charities in connection with the temples of Benares. As soon as he died, the English 
swallowed the whole amount. More than that, they took unlawful possession of a further sum 
of several lakhs of Rupees foolishly deposited with them by Anant Rao’s son, Vinayak Rao, 
in spite of the lesson he had already received. This was soon after Vinayak Rao’s death. Rao 
Madhav, the adopted son of Vinayak Rao, being a minor, as the supervision of the whole 
state was in the hands of the English, and Ramachandra Rao, the chief Karbhari, had been 
appointed by the English, there was every reason to suppose that there would not be much 
fear of revolt in the Kirwi State. But, in 1857, whatever the Raos and Maharaos did was not 
quietly acquiesced in by the people. Sometimes obsecurely and sometimes clearly, the power 
of the people, the strength of the real nation, was slowly struggling into prominence. The 
Zemindars, the priests, the merchants of Kirwi, nay, even the common people, inspired by the 
strong ideal of liberty, hailed with joy the news which one day proclaimed Delhi free and the 
next day Lucknow and the third that Jhansi had uprooted the flags of the Feringhi. 
Encouraged by these hopeful incidents, they proclaimed the independence of Kirwi and the 
destruction of the alien yoke, not waiting for the opinion of the Rao or the sanction of his 
ministers. Now, while this proclamation was being loudly celebrated by the populace, the 
Rao, a boy of nine or ten, had not done even a single thing against the English! Nay, when the 
English army returned to Bundelkhand, he went forward to receive them and invited them 
into the city. According to his invitation, the English army entered the city silently, but they 
entered to imprison this little Rao, to destroy his capital and to pull down his palace! Dreadful looting,6 wholesale burning, and a vengeance of wickedness took place. And the State was 
annexed. 
Whitlock now encamped at Mahoba, in order to ‘pacify’ the conquered provinces. As a 
matter of fact, he had now completed his campaign. He had conquered all the eastern part of 
Bundelkhand and he had sent small expeditions to ‘pacify’ one or two places. So now, 
leaving Whitlock, let us again follow the sacred steps of the gallant Queen of Jhansi. 
351 
The Ranee, now again full of hope, made an advance on Kunchgaon, forty-two miles from 
Kalpi, with the army of te Peshwa. But the Rao Sahib, if would appear, had not arranged the 
forces as she would have liked him to. It must be borne in mind, however, that it was not 
possible to make effective arrangements, either for Rao Sahib or Tatia Tope. Though in that 
place, the Nabob of Banda, the Raja of Shahgarh, and the Raja of Banapur had all gathered 
together under the same flat, they had not gathered together as the organised and disciplined 
parts of a grand military force, moved by oneness of heart, with a unity of plan and 
constitution, sustained by strict military discipline and subordination. No one could get his 
ideas carried out. But, in the opposing army, there was no such conflict amongst leaders. It 
seemed that the whole organisation was perfect and wellcontrolled. Before Sir Hugh Rose 
was appointed commander, there was heated discussion and difference of opinion; but, once 
he was the commander, his opinion was the opinion of all. Whatever orders he issued were 
6. “With regard to this injustice done to Rao, Malleson has to confess : “Not a shot 
had been fired against him (Whitlock), but he resolved nevertheless to treat the young Rao as 
though he had actually opposed the British forces. The reason for this perversion of honest 
dealing lay in the fact that in the palace of Kirwi was stored the wherewithal to compensate 
soldiers for many a hard fight and many a broiling sun. In its vaults and strong rooms were 
specie, jewels, and diamonds of priceless value..... The wealth was coveted.” – Kaye and 
Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, pages 140,141. 
right; and, even if they were not right, they must be obeyed. And even mistaken orders of a 
weak general carried out by the obedient and unanimous bravery of the troops under him, 
become successful – are bound to become successful. On the other hand, even well-planned 
orders of a capable general lead to disaster and defeat, through the self-willed behaviour of 
the troops and the lack of oneness in command and proper subordination. 
Otherwise the rout at Kunchgaon could never have been place. As soon as Sir Hugh Road 
came from Jhansi, the Revolutionaries met him at Kunchgaon. Knowing that the mid-day sun 
was unbearable to the English, the Revolutionaries had ordered in one of their commands, 
“None should engage in a fight with the Feringhis before ten in the morning. The fight should 
begin always after ten.” This very clever rule was put into practice this day. Much havoc was 
thereby created in the English army as happened on many other occasions where the fight 
352 
took place after ten. But, in spite of this, the Revolutionaries were defeated at Kunchgaon and 
retired towards Kalpi. The admirable way in which they retired, the organised manner in which they fell back has been praised very much even by the enemy.7 But then this excellent 
organisation came after and not before the engagement. With this defeat, the Revolutionaries 
came on to Kalpi. There, they began to make up for the defeat by wrangling against and 
abusing one another, - the infantry laid the defeat at the door of the cavalry, the cavalry 
blamed the Jhansi troops, and all together blamed the general, Tatia. 
But, Tatia Tope is not going to come any more to Kalpi to hear these wranglings. He has 
gone at present to the village of Charkhi, near Jalwan, to see his father. No one knows 
definitely where he is going after that, or whether he is going there at all. Let us remember 
that Gwalior lies in the direction of his road ! May the meeting between this extraordinary 
son and his fortunate father be full of love! And after that loving visit, may this great 
messenger of the Revolution go with despatch to carry out whatever designs he might have 
set his heart on! 
While Tatia was going on this journey, Ranee Lakshmi went to the royal tent of the Peshwa. 
The heroic Lakshmi relieved him of his dejection after the defeat of Kunchgaon and said to 
him that, if the army was properly organised, the enemy should never again be victorious. 
The Nabob of Banda was inspired by her speech. Proclamations in spirited language were 
again published in the Revolutionary army. And to-day, on the banks of the Jumna, crowds 
are gathering. Swords and guns, angry Sepoys invoking the Jumna to bless the cause of the 
indedpendence of their soil – such a Revolutionary pilgrimage the banks of the Jumna had 
probably never before seen. These banks are simply echoing forth the triumphant cries for the 
Mother and for Dharma!” Jai Jumna! With this thy sacred water in our hands, we swear that 
the Feringhis shall be extinct, that Swadesh shall be independent, and that Swadharma shall 
be re-established! Jai Jumna! If all this is accomplished, then alone we will live. If not, we 
will die this day on the field of battle. We swear, by thee, O Kalindi, three times!” 
Heroes, thrice bound by this oath, come on then to the field. Rao Sahib will lead the whole army. Drive away this 25th infantry under Sir Hugh Rose. They are all Indians – drive these 
traitors before you! Major Orr advances – make him share the same defeat! In this maidan 
before Kalpi, our position – with this undulatory part to cover – is almost impregnable. But 
look, the vanguard is falling back! It went too far, and being not well covered, has had to 
retreat. Run then, Lakshmi, run to protect them. She rushed forward sword in her hand with 
353 
lightning-like rapidity, and fell on the right wing of the English, with her red-uniformed 
cavalry. The triumphant right stopped dead, so sudden was the attack; stopped dead, and then 
retired back helpless. This rapid onslaught of the girl of twenty-one, her horse at full speed, 
her sword cutting men down to the right and to the left, - seeing this, who would not fight for 
her? Who would not be inspired by her? All the Revolutionaries were inspired by her 
strength; the battle raged bloody and hot. The Feringhi gunners of the light field artillery 
began to die one after another. The Ranee and her cavalry, then, advanced right on the guns 
which were spitting deadly fire, and attacked the artillery. English gunners left the guns; the 
horse artillery was routed; the heroes of the Revolution advanced on and on, from all sides, 
overjoyed at the prospect of crushing the Feringhis who had so long escaped them; and 
before them all fought Lakshmi! 
7. “Then was witnessed action on the part of the rebels which impelled admiration 
from their enemies. The manner in which they conducted their retreat could not be surpassed. 
They remembered the lessons which the European officers had well taught them. There was 
no hurry, no disorder, no rushing to the rear. All was orderly as on a field-day. Though their 
line of skirmishers was two miles in length, it never wavered in a single point. The men fired, 
then ran behind the relieving men, and loaded. The relieving men then fired, and ran back in 
their turn. They even attempted, when they thought the pursuit was too rash, to take up a 
position, so as to bring on it an enfilading fire.” – Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, page 
124. This praise by the enemy does credit to the Panday party. 
Sir Hugh Rose, taken aback by this terrible onslaught, then advanced with his reserve camels, 
and the English saved their own lives, simply because of the camels. An English writter says, 
“Fifteen minutes more, and the mutineers would have cut us down! Fresh camels, one 
hundred and fifty in number, changed the fortunes of the day. Ever since that day, I have 
looked on the camel with eyes of affection.” By the strength of the camelmen alone, on the 22nd of May, the Feringhis succeeded in forcing the Peshwa’s army to retire towards Kalpi. 
After another complete defeat of the Peshwa’s troops and after a few skirmishes, Sir Hugh entered Kalpi on the 24th May. In the fort of Kalpi, the English captured a very considerable 
amount of military supplies which Shri Rao Sahib Peshwa and Tatia Tope had, with great 
trouble, gathered together in one year. Sixty thousand pounds of gunpowder were found 
buried under the ground; muskets beautifully made, brass balls of the latest type for the guns, 
factories for making and repairing cannon-balls, heaps of military uniforms, flags, drums, 
354 
French trumpets, Howitzer guns manufactured in Europe, and arms of various kind – such 
was the very useful find that the English army came upon! 
What they did not capture was the brave and ever-memorable leaders of the Revolutionaries. 
For, when Kalpi fell after a week, Rao Sahib, the Nabob of Banda, Ranee Lakshmi Bai, and 
other leaders had left Kalpi and gone – nobody knew where. But now these unfortunate, 
helpless people, without an army and without arms, could do nothing beyond falling into the 
jaws of death, either by privations, or ny capture, or ny suicide! 
Thus Sir Colin had begun the reconquest from the northern bank of the Jumna, and went on 
conquering as far as the Himalayas. Sir Hugh Rose and Whitlock be.gan from the Narbada, 
and conquered all the country as far as the South bank of the Jumna. The English had now 
every reason to congratulate themselves that they had destroyed the Revolution completely. 
Sir Hugh Rose congratulated his army in these eloquent words :- “Soldiers, you have 
marched one thousand miles, captured one hundred guns, swam rivers, crossed mountains, 
marched through jungles, defeated big armies, reconquered extensive tracts, and re- 
established the glory of your country! Brave you are; and you have also observed the strictest 
discipline; for courage without discipline is nought. In the midst of difficulties, temptations, 
and trouble, you have obeyed strictly the orders of your general, and have never showed even 
a single sign of insubordination. From the waters of the Narbada to the waters of the Jumna, 
this, your success, has come to you through your splendid discipline!” 
After publishing this glorifying proclamation, Sir Hugh resigned his charge for the sake of his 
health. And the triumphant English army, having destroyed the enemy completely, sighed the 
sigh of relief and wished to rest. 
But how dare you rest yet? While Tatia and Ranee Lakshmi Bai are alive, there is no rest 
possible for the British troops. Come, stand up! And if you would not stand of your own 
accord, here is the whole force of Gwalior, ready to goad you on! After escaping from Kalpi, 
the Revolutionary leaders went to Gopalpur to discuss their future plans. Practically, at this 
time, there was not a sign of hope. From the Narbada to the Jumna, and from Jumna to the 
Himalayas, the English had conquered back the whole territory. The Revolutionaries were 
without an army, without a fort, without any hope of getting fresh forces – defeated as they 
were again and again. But Tatia Tope was still alive, and that was enough! Tatia, too, had 
returned to Gopalpur. People say he had returned after visiting his father. Whatever people 
355 
say, history does not say so. It was when Sir Hugh tried his deep-laid game at Kalpi that Tatia 
had a sudden fit of fondness for his father – a fondness, by –the-bye, which seemed to exceed 
even his fondness for fight; and, no longer able to control his filial feelings, he want to 
Charkhi to see his father. What was the secret of this sudden passion? The secret was that, as 
soon as Kalpi fell, it was absolutely necessary to get hold of some other strong position, some 
strong fortress, and some new army. And, therefore, this Messenger of the Revolution had 
escaped from Kalpi secretly to enter Gwalior, and see how the Revolutionary idea was 
progressing there! He accepted the promises of the chief officers of the army and created a 
new army for the Revolution, by secretly winning over the Durbar functionaries, Sirdars, and 
others. They promised to give him all the aid they could, and in one month he had the whole 
of Gwalior in the hollow of his hand. He then collected every information about the military 
position of Gwalior and, thus, after undermining the throne of the Scindia, Tatia returned to 
Rao Sahib at Gopalpur. He had ‘seen his father’! 
Learning the glad news, that Tatia had come back from Gwalior having successfully won 
over the people to the sided of the Revolution, Ranee Lakshmi urged the Peshwa to advance straight towards Gwalior. On the 28th of May, the Revolutionaries came to Amin Mahal. The 
Mahalkars tried to stop them. They were answered, “Who are you to obstruct us? We are the 
Peshwa and his forces and we are fighting for Swaraj and Swadharma.” 
These words of Rao Sahib silenced the cowards, and thousands of patriots in that part 
welcomes the Revolutionaries heartily, and thus the army of the Peshwa pressed right on the 
walls of the city of Gwalior. They had written to the Scindia, “We are coming to you in a 
friendly spirit. Remember our former relations. We expect help from you, so that we shall be 
enabled to proceed towards the south.” But this ungrateful man had forgotten the former 
relations. Well then, remember the former and the present relations too! “The ancestors of the 
Scindia were our servants, our Hujres – that was the former relation. And, the present 
relation? The whole army of the present Scindia has joined us. Tatia had gone to Gwalior, 
seen the leaders, and gained all necessary information!” But still, forgetting all this the Scindia, with all his army and all his guns, advanced on the Peshwa on the 1st of June, near 
Gwalior. The Shrimant who deserves the respect of the whole country thought for a moment 
that the Scindia had repented and was coming forward to salute the flag of Swadesh. But, 
Lakshmi said that he was coming, not to salute, but to smash that golden flag. She came 
forward with her three hundred horsemen and advanced right on the guns of the Scindia. 
Soon, she caught the view of Jayaji Rao Scindia and his personal guard the brave 
356 
“Bhaleghate” troops. The cobra shows not such rage when it is trodden upon as Lakshmi 
showed at the sight of this traitor! Like an arrow she dashed at his troops. Behold, you 
Bahadur – descendant of Mahadaji, this helpless girl of twenty-two, brought up in the 
Zenana, is inving you for a trial of strength of the sword! Let us all see now how much of the 
prowess of Mahadaji, the devoted lover of his country, has descended upon this Jayaji the 
devoted slave of the Feringhi! As soon as this angry lightning struck him hard on the front, 
his personal guards wavered and the Scindia, with all his “Bhaleghate” troops,was routed. 
But, at least, there was hope that his huge army and terrible artillery would do their best – and 
they did do their best! As soon as they saw Tatia, these troops which had been bound over by 
secret oaths to Tatia refused, point-blank, to fight against the Peshwa. As previously 
arranged, they joined the Peshwa with all their officers; the guns were silent and everyone in 
Gwalior honoured the flag of the Peshwa. The throne of the Scindia thus crumbled to pieces 
at the touch of the Revolutionary magician. 
And so, Jayaji Rao Scindia, coward as he was, and his minister, Dinkar Rao, fled, not only 
from the field, but from Gwalior itself, and ran to Agra! 
Gwalior, was now mad with joy. The army fired salutes in honour of the Shrimant. The 
Finance Minister, Amar Chand Bhatia, surrendered the whole treasury of the Scindia, to the 
last pie, to Shrimant. Those few patriots who were in prison under the old regime for having 
shown sympathy with the Revolutionaries were released from their prisons amidstthe joyous 
cries of the populace. The traitors who had advised the Scindia to join the English had fled, 
but their mansions and their property were destroyed so that not a vestige of them remained. 
The black charge that the Asiatics do not understand the true relation between a ruler and his 
subjects, was washed away completely by Gwalior. For, how can he who goes against his 
own country and against his own Dharma be a ruler? Poona had been in 1818 guilty of being 
a traitor to the motherland is not having dragged Rao Baji from his Peshwai in right time. 
Gwalior was not guilty of that! And therefore, this Revolution of 1857 must be recorded in 
history as the first indication in modern India of the omnipotence of the vox populi, the power 
of the people. If Scindia joins not his country, the country shall not aid him either. Swords 
and guns, infantry and cavalry, Durbar and Sirdars, Mankarees and citizens, temples and 
images – all are for the country, alone; and if the Scindia is not for the country, drag him 
down from his throne; and outside the palace, outside the capital, outside the borders of the 
kingdom let him be driven out! Hereafter, according to the Scriptures, “The King receives his 
power only by pleasing the people!” 
357 
And now, we must not let this auspicious day, the 3rd of June, slip by uselessly. And so “a big 
Durbar was held in Phul Bagh. All Sirdars, statesmen noblemen, Shiledars, and cavalry 
officers, who had joined the Shrimant, took their seats according to their rank. Tatia Tope and 
the Arabs, Rohillas, Pathans, Rajputs, Rangdes, Pardeshis, and others under him came to the 
Durbar in their military uniform and with swords by their side. The Shrimant himself was 
dressed in the Peshwa’s uniform Shirpana and Kalgitura on head, pearls in his ears, and pearl 
and diamond necklaces, round his neck. Thus, with all the paraphernalia of the Peshwai, 
Bhaldars and Chobdars making way for him, and Mourchas flying, the Shrimant came to the 
Durbar. Then, as usual, all stood up in reverence, salutes were received, and the Shrimant 
ascended the throne. With tears of joy in his eyes, he congratulated all the noblemen with 
great eloquence. Ram Rao Govind was appointed Chief Minister. Tatia Tope was made 
general and a sword studded with precious stones was presented to him. The eight ministers 
were elected. Twenty lakhs of Rupees were distributed to the army. The Durbar was a complete success. Joy was on every face and salutes of guns were fired.”7 
Shrimant Rao Sahib, representative of Nana Sahib Peshwa, had thus established a new 
throne, infusing a new hope and a new life into the Revolutionary party, and had created a 
centre, a basis, round which might be attracted the scattered forces of the Revolution. Tatia 
Tope was not mad in busying himself with this coronation and giving salutes after salutes just 
7. D.B.Parasnis’s Life of Lakshmi Bai, page 309. 
in a midst of the war. The whole world had seen the dead body of the Revolution which by 
this means alone he now lifted from the grave of despair. The world – some with pleasure and 
others with despair – had cried : “That is a dead body, there is no life in it!” But what 
wonderful magic this! Tatia took the dead earth at Gopalpur, he breathed on it thus, and – 
wonderful! – the whole world saw with the dumbness of surprise, a throne rising from the 
thimbleful of earth, jingling with lakhs of Rupees! Wonder of wonders! See the thousands of 
swordsmen advancing; hear the salutes thundering forth from the guns! A new army is up, 
new guns are up, Tatia has captured a new kingdom! Tatia has done all this not meely to 
strike the world dumb with his splendid triumph. He knew that the Revolutionaries who had 
spread far and wide would, on hearing the salutes proclaiming the Shrimant as a Peshwa of 
the Mahratta empire, get a concentrated inspiration, vigour, and hope. He knew that the sight 
of the triumphant flag of the nation, thus unfurled at Gwalior, would infuse an uncontrollable 
enthusiasm and dash. He knew that the lawlessness which had set in owing to the want of a 
358 
rallying point, would now make way for discipline, through respect for the new-established 
throne. All this Tatia saw. And what he foresaw soon came to pass. For the body of the 
Panday party was soon instinct with life. While thus, on the one hand, his countrymen were 
encouraged, the English army, which just gave a sigh of relief, was, on the other hand, again 
disheartened. It was for this that the coronation was proclaimed loudly by Tatia and other 
leaders of the Revolution. Their deep-laid game was successful. For, by this very thunder of Tatia’s cannon, Sir Hugh Rose’s idea of rest was rudely shattered to pieces!8 
8. Malleson, writing about the cleverness and diplomacy which Tatia and Lakshmi 
Bai showed in taking Gwalior, says :- “How the “Impossible” happened has been told..... He 
(Sir Hugh Rose) realised, moreover, the great danger which would inevitably be caused by 
delay. No one could foresee the extent of evil possible if Gwalior were not promptly wrested 
from rebel hands. Grant them delay, and Tatia Tope, with the immense acquisition of 
political and military strength secured by the possession of Gwalior, and with all its resources 
in men, money and material at his disposal, would be able to form a new army on the 
fragments of that beaten at Kalpi, and to provoke a Mahratta rising throughout India. It might 
be possible for him, using the dexterity of which he was a master, to unfurl the Peshwa’s 
banner in the southern Mahratta districts. Those districts were denudedof troops, and a 
striking success in Central India would probably decide their inhabitants to pronounce in 
favour of the cause for which their fathers had fought and bled.” – Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, 
Vol. V, pages 149-150. 
So far so good; but once having shocked Sir Hugh Rose and disheartened him, woe betide 
him who listened not to the words of Ranee Lakshmi Bai! All other functions but the one 
great function of war must be stopped. But it seemed that, as ill-luck would have it, the 
intoxication of the Revolutionaries would make them blind to the necessity of heeping the 
army in complete readiness. They were all immersed in luxury, good dinners, and fatal 
dilatoriness – they thought, perhaps, that this was the sole end of Swaraj! 
They were onlo losing Swaraj. For, the surprised Sir Hugh Rose marched rapidly on Gwalior 
with his excellent army under him. He brought with him the renegade Scindia and proclaimed 
to all that the English were going to fight only for the Scindia’s sake! It was a trick to deceive 
the simple men of Gwalior, who had the slavish and discreditable merit of blind loyalty, and 
it was calculated to prevent these from fighting against the Scindia. But the old world had 
changed, giving place to the new. Tatia, so far successful in awakening the Revolutionaries, 
359 
rushed forward to meet the English. The English had already defeated the Morar contingents. 
Now, with the shadow of defeat on them, there began some excited movements among the 
Revolutionary leaders. Rao Sahib was hastening towards the house of the Nabob of Banda 
and the Nabob of Banda was rushing towards the house of Rao Sahib. But, in the midst of all 
this confusion, the Ranee alone was calm and was ready. Her sword was out. What need she 
fear now? Hope as well as despair she had trampled under foot; she treated with contempt the 
things on this earth; she had one aspiration alone, namely, that the flag of liberty should stand 
proudly erect until she gave up her last breath! Neither of them were to be in the dust; they 
were to lie in battle alone. So, she gave Rao Sahib a word of courage, rearranged the 
undisciplined troops as far as she could, and took upon herself the task of guarding the 
eastern gate. She only demanded, “I am ready with all my soul to do my duty; mind, you do 
yours!” 
She donned her usual military uniform, rode a noble steed, took out her gem-bestudded sword 
from the sheath, and ordered the army under her to march on. She made ready all the posts 
near Kotaki Serai which had been given to her care and, when the English army was in sight, 
everywhere, trumpets and pipes, drums and nagaras rent the air. If only she had an army, 
equal in courage and daring to herself! Even the insubordinate and hesitating felt heroic under 
her influence and, with them and her select band of horsemen, she charged hard the English 
army! Her two female friends, Mandar and Kashi, also fought bravely by her side. May the 
sweet memory of those two patriotic girls – beautiful in appearance, with male attire put on, 
taking pleasure in fight – live in history along with that of their mistress as long as history 
lives! A general like Smith was charging the Ranee’s army, but to-day the Ranee’s bravery 
and daring were a sight to see. Like lightning, she moved about all day. The English attacked 
the solid phalanx a number of times. One very occasion she maintained her hold firm. Her 
army occasionally felt enthusiastic and attacked the British and cut down many of them. At 
last, Smith was forced to retire; he gave up the attempt of breaking the mass and began to 
turn to another side, leaving the nest of the cobra alone! 
Thus closed the day and thus rose the 18th of the month! This day, the English had resolved to 
make desperate charges. From all directions, they advanced on the fort, and tried their utmost. 
General Smith, forced to retire the day before, was very determined to-day and, aided by re- 
inforcements, he charged the same Jhansi side he had gone for the day before. Sir Hugh Rose 
thought that his presence was also absolutely necessary and so he was personally present with 
the force attacking the Jhansi side. The Ranee too was ready for him with all her forces. “She 
360 was ready with all her soul to do her duty.” That day, she wore a Chanderi turban 
embroidered all over, a tamamee cloak, and pyjamas. A pearl necklace was round her neck. 
Her famous steed being tired that day, a new, fresh-looking horse was made ready for her, 
fully caparisoned. While her two beautiful maids were taking sherbet, news came that the 
English were advancing. Lakshmi immediately darted forwarded from her tent. The arrow 
flies not so rapidly, the lightning flashes not forth with such force from the clouds, a lioness 
leaves not her lair so quickly to fall upon the approaching elephant! She rode her horse, lifted 
her sword, and charged the enemy with her army. As English writer says, “Immediately the 
beautiful Ranee went over the field and made a firm stand against the array of Sir Hugh Rose. 
She led her troops to repeated and fierce attacks and, though her ranks were pierced through 
and were gradually becoming thinner and thinner, the Ranee was seen in the foremost rank, 
rallying her shattered troops and performing prodigies of valour. But all was of no avail. The 
camel corps, pushed up by Shri Huge Rose in person, broke her last line. Still the dauntless 
and heroic Ranee held her own.” 
But while her side was fighting with such unexampled bravery, she saw the English army 
advancing on her rear – for they had broken through the ranks of Revolutionaries who were 
holding the posts behind her! 
The artillery dumb, the main army routed, the victorious English army closing on her from all 
sides, with only fifteen or twenty horsemen with her, Ranee Lakshmi, accompanied by her 
maids, put her horse to a gallop, in order to break through the enemy, and to join her 
comrades on the other side. The Feringhi horsemen of the Hussars, who knew not so far 
where she was, fired shot after shot on her and pursued her like hounds. But the Queen, with 
unexampled courage, cleared her way with her sword and marched on. Suddenly was heard a 
cry, “I am dead, Bai Sahib, I am dead!” Alas, whose is this cry? Lakshmi turned round and 
found that it was her maid Mandar whom a white soldier had shot and killed! Angered, she 
attacked the Feringhi, and her blow felled him on the spot. She had avenged the death of fair 
Mandar! She then marched on. She came to a small rill. Now, one jump and Jhansi would 
have been out of the Feringhi’s clutches. But her horse would not take that jump! If only she 
had had her old horse! As if the fiery line of a magician was round him the horse moved in 
circles, round and round, but would not cross. Before you could say “one”, the English 
horsemen closed on her! Still not a word of surrender or fear! One sword against their several 
swords, - yet she closed on them. She crossed sword with sword with them all, but one of 
them hit her on the head from behind. With that blow, the right part of her head, and even her 
361 
right eye came out – just then, another blow hit her on the chest. Oh Lakshmi, Lakshmi! The 
last drop of thy sacred blood is dripping and, therefore, now, Mother, take this last sacrifice 
for thee! Even at the point of death, she killed the British foe who had attacked her, and now 
the young Queen was breathing her last breath! A faithful servant, Ramchandra Rao 
Deshmukh, was near. He took her to a cottage near by. Ganga Das Bawa gave her cold water 
to drink to quench her thirst and a bed to lie down upon. Bathed in blood, this goddess of war 
reclined on the bed, and then her soul quietly fleeteed from her body to heaven! As soon as 
she was dead, Ramchandra Rao, in accordance with her dying instructions prepared a pile of 
grass unseen by the enemy; he put her on that pure and, before the touch of slavery could 
defile even her dead body, she was cremated. 
On the pyre, if not on the throne! But Lakshmi is still with her sweetheart Liberty! She has 
forced open the gates of death by falling in battle and has now entered the other world. 
Pursuit can no longer harm her. Wicked Pursuit must pass through those roaring flames 
before it can do so. 
Thus fought Lakshmi. She had achieved her purpose, fulfilled her ambition, carried out her 
resolve! One such life vindicates the whole existence of a nation! She was the concentrated 
essence of all virtues. A mere woman, hardly twenty-three yet, beautiful as rose, charming in 
her manners, pure of conduct, she had a power of organisation of her subjects, exhibited by 
very few, even among men. The flame of patriotism was always burning in her heart. And 
she proud of her country’s honour and pre-eminent in war! It is very rarely that a nation is so 
fortunate as to be able to claim such an angelic person, as a daughter and a queen. That 
honour has not yet fallen to the lot of England. In the Revolution of Italy, high ideals and 
heroism of the very highest type are to be found; yet, in all this period of glody, Italy could 
not give birth to Lakshmi! 
But, even our land could hardly have given birth to such a Queen but for this glorious War of 
Independence! The precious pearls in the ocean are not to be found on its surface. The 
Suryakanta jewel does not give out flames in the quiet of the night; nor does the flint give up 
its spark on soft cushions. They want resistance. Injustice must make the mind restless; 
really, not apparently, every drop of blood most actually boil; intense national feeling is thus 
set aflane in such a furnace, the particles of virtue begin to flow, the test goes on, the dross is 
eliminated, then, the concentrated essence of virtues begins to appear. In 1857, the heart of 
this our Motherland took fire; then, a terrible explosion which would deafen the world took 
362 
place; - A spark at Meerut, and the whole country, which, under the roller of Dalhousie, had 
been reduced to the monotony of a dead level and seemed to be a heap of dust, proved to be a 
powder-magazine filled with the most inflammable material. Just as when a mighty rocket in 
a fireplay, fired in the air, explodes, arrows and trees and various other picturesque objects 
rise and rush and burn and die away, such was the case of this gigantic Revolutionary 
Rocket! Its length is from Meerut to the Vindhyas; its width from Peshawar to Dumdum;- 
and it was fired! Fire and flames raged in all directions. Blood coming down like rain, - 
sieges of Delhi, revenges of Plassey, massacres of Cawnpore, and the Sikandar Bagh of 
Lucknow! Thousands of heroes are fighting – and dying; cities are burning. Kumar Singh 
comes, struggles, falls; the Moulvie comes, struggles, and falls; the throne of Cawnpore, the 
throne of Lucknow, the throne of Delhi, the throne of Bareilly, the throne of Jagadishpur, the 
throne of Jhansi, the throne of Banda, the throne of Furrukabad, five thousand, ten thousand, 
fifty thousand, a lakh of swords, flags, banners, generals, horses, elephants – all are coming 
out out after another, move about in the turmoil of the raging fire! Some are ascending one 
flame, some another; they poise themselves a while, reel, fight, fall down unseen! 
Everywhere battle and thunder-storms! A veritable volcanic conflagration this! And the pyre, 
flaming near the cottage of Gangadas Bawa, is the last and the most lustrous flame of this 
raging volcanic conflagration of the War of Independence of 1857! 
END OF THE THIRD PART 
PART-IV TEMPORARY PACIFICATION 
CHAPTER-I A BIRD’S-EYE VIEW 
THE chief scenes in the War of 1857 being in Northern India, we had so long to dilate upon 
the warlike events in that region alone. But, in order to grasp even the general tenor of the 
War, it is necessary to see its manifestations in other provinces also. Therefore, while the 
tongues of fire of that tremendous conflagration are dancing up to the skies there, we must 
also case a passing glance at the sparks in other regions. 
363 
We have already given a short description of the events in the Punjab, during the course of 
the siege of Delhi. After that, the Punjab was quiet on the whole, except for one or two 
spasmodic efforts at rising. The Hindu as well as the Mahomedan communities thoroughly 
sympathised at heart with the Revolutionaries and were full of hatred towards the British. But 
they did not care to help either party actively. The Sikh princes and people, on the contrary, 
did not wish well to the Revolutionaries even at heart; nor did they remain neutral; nay, more, 
they did not hesitate to side openly with the English and shed the blood of their own 
countrymen on the field of battle. 
It can be proved from many events that happened that the sympathies of the masses of 
Rajputana were on the side of the Revolutionaries. In towns like Jaipur, Jodhpur, and 
Udaipur, the curses that were heaped upon Indian soldiers fighting on the English side, the 
shouts of joy that went up in the bazaars, when a Revolutionary victory was announced, and 
the grief with which they were filled when the news of their defeat came – all these showed 
from day to day that the Rajpur masses were praying for victory of the Revolutionaries in the 
great national war. As regards the princes of Rajputana, most of them remained neutral and 
would not openly help either side, until a decisive conflict had taken place. But whenever 
they were forced to send some troops to help the English, these troops openly disobeyed the 
orders of their rulers and refused to fight against their brethren on behalf of the Feringhis! 
The United Provinces, Oudh, Rohilkhand, Behar, Bundelkhand and Central India were the 
field of Kurukshetra of the War of Independence of 1857. There was a slight rising at 
Rangoon, and in Burma, in general, but alas! it was a day after the fair, and was in vain! 
After this bird’s-eye view of the region north of the Vindhya mountains, let us now turn our 
eyes to the south. There, we first of all see the Empire of the Mahrattas founded by Shivaji. 
Their compatriots, who had migrated to the north, were fighting fierce battles at Cawnpore, 
Kalpi, and Jhansi. Thus, the Mahratta throne, ousted out of Raigarh, reappeared again in an 
ocean of blood at Cawnpore. And Tatia Tope was again flying aloft on high the banner once 
supported by heroes like Santaji and Dhanaji. If the magnificent unanimity, dash, and 
determination that characterised the rising in the north had also shown itself in the south, 
then, even if the whole of England had gone to India to fight, the Jaripatka would never have 
been lowered! Where, indeed, is a man of pure Mahratta blood whose heart is not agitated by 
love and price when the Jaripatka flies on the field, whether he shows it in his face or not? In 
1857, also, the heroic inspiration naturally took hold of the heart of all Mahrattas, but the 
364 
diseases of indecision and indetermination stifled it in embryo. While the plan of the 
Revolution was being outlines in the north, its messengers were also travelling in the south, 
visiting state after state and town after town. Rango Bapuji of Satara was in correspondance 
with Nana Sahib of Cawnpore. In the various Sepoy regiments stationed at Poona, Satara, 
Dharwar, Belgaum, Hyderabad and other places, Brahmins, Moulvies, and the deputies of the 
northern Sepoys were travelling about secretly with the torch of Revolution in their hand. 
And, from Mysore right up to the Vindhya mountains, oaths were taken that a rising was to 
be made as soon as the north arose. But, though the south did not forget to rise, it forgot that 
it ought to arise as soon as the north rose! The Rising in the north took place with an 
inconceivable, lightning-like rapidity, and with the determination to kill or die. Instead of 
starting up immediately, the south waited for some time to watch the fortune of war in the 
north. In times of crisis like a Revolution, one moment decides the question of life or death. 
There are disadvantages in both alternatives, in haste as well as in delay. In such a dilemma, 
an able man fixes upon such a moment when boldness and spirit will reap the greatest 
possible fruits. Revolutions do not follow the rules of arithmetic. They succeed through the 
enormous strength of the spirit in the heart of man. They cool down by the sluggishness of 
inaction. They are kept up only by the heat of action. Calmness, mathematics, and the fixing 
of the day are all for the period of preparation. But when once the bugle has sounded and the 
drum been beaten, then there must be started at once determined fighting without any regard 
of life. One who hesitates then is certain to lose in the end. One who only just then begins to 
think out whether it is better to rise or not, is doomed for ever. Calmness in preparation, but 
boldness in execution, this should be the watchword. During preparation, one may and even 
ought to procfeed cautiously, step by step, even as on a carpet; but when the Revolution has 
once broken out, one must dart forth like an arrow without faltering a moment, even though 
living fire! Then let there be success or defeat, let there be life or death – there should be 
stubborn war, men should be ready to “die while killing.” For when once the drum of war is 
beaten, the best road to success in a Revolution lies in advancing and never in waiting. 
The south forgot this cardinal principle. It did not rise as soon as the north rose. It proceeded 
slowly, staggering every now and then. Over-anxiety about success, and only spasmodic, 
isolated risings that followed as its consequence, necessarily led to nothing but certain failure. 
How this came to pass we shall review in brief. 
There were three important regiments in the south, the 27th at Kolhapur, the 29th at Belgaum, and the 28th at Dharwar. When the plans of the Rising were made by means of 
365 
correspondence, the 10th of August was fixed upon as the day on which they were to rise. But 
an English army was in the meanwhile being sent to Kolhapur to keep the population and the 
Sepoys there in check. This news was divulged to the Sepoys by an official of the Telegraph Department. Thus the Sepoys who were already infuriated, rose prematurely on the 31st of 
July, 1857. They killed some of their English officers, took the treasury in their charge, had a 
skirmish with the English troops that had just arrived, and went away towards the Ghats. The 
various Revolutionary bands united together under the leadership of Ramji Shirsal of 
Swantwadi and began to harass the English force in the direction of the Kadi forest. They 
were defeated and dispersed after some months by the English with the help of the 
Portuguese of Goa. The new English officer, Jacob, who had come to Kolhapur, disarmed the 
remaining Sepoys there and had their leaders shot. 
But on the day on which the Sepoys at Kolhapur had risen the town itself had not done so. In 
the meanwhile, emissaries from Nana Sahib of Cawnpore had an audience with the young 
king of Kolhapur and persuaded him to join the National Rising. He had also been presented 
with a sword by the Durbar of Lucknow. In the same manner, he was carrying on secret 
correspondence with the Rajas of Sangli, Jamkhindi, and other southern states. But, more 
than the Maharaja, his younger brother, Chimna Sahib, had in his veins the blood of Shivaji. 
He secretly began machinations to put right again the plans of the Revolution foiled by the 
recent turn of events. He prepared the irregular army of Kolhapur and many volunteers for a Rising, and in the early morning of the 15th of December Kolhapur rose again. The city gates 
were closed, guns were made ready, and the drum of Revolution was beaten in the streets. As 
soon as Jacob heard the news, he got the men under him ready and led an attack on a 
Kachcha gate. From that moment onward till the time that the English army took possession 
of the palace, a fierce battle raged. After defeat, the Raja, following the usual custom, 
declared that the Rising was organised by the army and the populace in spite of his orders to 
the contrary. When the names of the Revolutionary leaders were demanded, he replied that he 
knew nothing about it! Jacob tried his utmost to get hold of the leaders. He put many people, 
now and then, in prison, simply on suspicion; but he could get no scent of the vast and 
dangerous conspiracy. One of the leaders, even as he was being arrested, tore up an 
incriminating letter in his possession and swallowed it in the presence of his captors! Of the 
many who were blown from the mouths of cannon, one was only wounded at the first firing 
and was not killed. Still he proudly stood forth erect waiting for the second round. Just then, 
Jacob went up to him and said, “I pity you – you must have been betrayed into the Rebellion. 
So, if you help the Sirkar by divulging the names of some mutineers, your life will be 
366 
spared!” But the grand hero bore, without a murmur, the excruciating pain of his mangled 
body manfully, and “he looked at me (Jacob) with a scowl and scorn mingled and answered 
unhesitatingly ‘What I have done, I have done’.” Without giving out a single name, he turned 
his face and stood forth boldly in front of the death-spitting cannon! Another Revolutionary, 
just before being blown up, muttered the name of a leader; at this, one of the Government 
servants present there quietly slunk away and warned that leader and others who were 
implicated in the town. When the English authorities, inquiring the whereabouts of the person 
named, came up to arrest him, he was already out of Kolhapur and safe! With such fidelity to 
each other did the conspirators work, and the organisation of the various circles and batches was effected without much hitch or confusion.1 
1. “But it is difficult to describe the wonderful secrecy with which the whole 
conspiracy was conducted and the forethought supplying the schemes, and the caution with 
which each group of conspirators worked apart, concealing the connecting links, and 
instructing them with just sufficient information for the purpose in view. And all this was 
equalled only by the fidelity with which they adhered to each other.”- Western India by Sir 
George Le Grand Jacob, K.C.S.I., C.B. 
While affairs were in this state at Kolhapur, there were also signs of rising in Belgaum about the 10th of August. But the Sepoy leader, Thakur Singh, and a bold Munshi, the leader of the 
citizens, were arrested just at the last moment. A new English army was soon on the scene 
and Belgaum and Dharwar soon became silent and submissive. The above-named Munshi 
was a Government servant and incriminating letters from him were found on the Sepoys at 
Poona ad Kolhapur. So, on the evidence of these, he was blown from the mouth of a cannon. 
At Satara, Rango Bapuji was from the first, in the bad books of the Government. Now, his 
son was hanged for preaching the doctrine of the Rising at Kolhapur. At the same time, two 
princes of the Satara royal family were banished. Seeing the throne, in the devoted service of 
which he had spent so many years, in such a plight, the faithful Rango Bapuji disappeared 
from Satara. Rewards were offered but nobody helped to hand him over to the English. And 
the fate of that patriot is not known even to this day. 
367 
At this time, an able Englishman, called Lord Elphinstone, was appointed Governor of 
Bombay. He had not only born the strain – small though it was – in his own presidency, but 
also sent troops to Rajputana. But, if it was any one man whose cleverness prevented a rising 
in the city of Bombay itself, it was Forrest, the chief police officer. Bombay was a city full of 
easy-going, happy-go-lucky, and traitorous cowards. Thus, the only hearts susceptible to the 
flame of the national Revolution there were amongst the ranks of the Sepoys stationed thee. 
And therefore it was that Forrest had kept a very close watch upon them. The Dipavali 
holidays were fixed upon as the opportune moment for rising and the Sepoys began to hold 
secret meetings. Forrest tried his utmost to send detectives into these meetings but did not 
succeed on account of the extraordinary caution displayed by the Sepoys. Therefore, now as a 
Brahmin, now as some one else, and thus mixed with the people even in their exclusive 
dinner parties. At last he found out that the secret meetings were held in the house of a man 
called Ganga Prasad. Then he entered the house of Ganga Prasad after threatening to arrest 
him if he opposed, and saw what happened at one of those secret meetings through an 
aperture in the wall, unknown to the Revolutionaries who met there. Not only this, but he also 
brought with him later on some English officers of the regiment and let them see the secret 
meetings for themselves. When the latter saw there coming in to the meeting, one after 
another, Sepoys who were reckoned as the most loyal, they whispered in amazement, “My 
God, my own men! Is it possible?” The general plan of the Sepoys was to make a rising in 
Bombay at first, then to march towards Poona, capture that city, raise the banner of Mahratta Kingdom, and proclaim Nana Sahib as Peshwa.2 But before the plans would be put into 
operation, Forrest broke up the conspiracy, hanged two of the ringleaders as rebels, and 
banished six of the prominent and leading military men; and thus the rising in Bombay was 
nipped in the bud. 
At about the same time, the Revolutionary spark was about to strike Nagpur and Jubbulpore. The Sepoys near Nagpur had decided to rise on the 13th June, 1857, and this plan was assented to by most of the prominent citizens. It was agreed that on the night of the 13th 
townspeople should send up in the air three burning baloons, and at this signal the military 
were to rise. The Revolutionaries there had another advantage; the English could spare no 
European troops for the provinces of Nagpur and Jubbulpore at that time. But soon the Indian 
regiments from Madras came and the sparks of Revolution were speedily extinguished. The 
Gond king of Jubbulpore, Shankar Singh, and his won were doing their utmost for the 
Revolution. When they were arrested and their palace was searched, a small paper containing 
the king’s morning-prayers was found folded in a silk cloth. Its English translation is as 
368 
follows:- The kind, Shankar Singh, meditating on the terrible image of the Goddess Chandi 
says, “Shut the mouths of slanderers; trample the sinners! Shatru-Samharike! Killer of 
enemies!) Listen to the cry of Religion; support your slave, Mathalike! Kill the British; exterminate them; Mata Chandi!” 3 etc.etc. 
King Shankar Singh and his son had tried to enlist the 52nd native regiment at Jubbulpore in 
the cause of the Revolution. Therefore, the two royal personages were blown from the mouth of cannon on the 18th of September, 1957. At this news, the 52nd regiment, instead of being 
cowed down, was infuriated, rose immediately, killed an officer, called Mac Gregor, and 
marched away to the war. 
There were risings in the Dhar state and at Mahidpur, Goria, and other places, organised by 
Prince Feroze Shah of Delhi. We cannot describe the details of all these risings for want of 
space. 
2. Forrest’s Real Danger in India. 
3. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. II, page 144. 
But, more than all the princes mentioned above, the fate of the English power in India lay in 
hands of the Nizam of Hyderabad. The new Nizam, Afzul-ud-daulah, had just come to the 
throne in May 1857, and the Prime Ministership was in the hands of a man called Sir Salar 
Jung. The whole of the Deccan hung upon one word from the lips of Sir Salar Jung. If the 
Nizam, of Hyderabad had joined the National Revolution, the whole of the Deccan would 
have risen like one man, and the corfd of English rule, already strained to breaking point by 
the risings in the north, would have been snapped to pieces. Nor can we say that no one 
preached to Salar Jung the doctrine of a patriotic rising against the English. Though we take 
for granted that he was too “loyal” to let love of religion, country, and independence even 
whisper such a thought into his mind, still the people of Hyderabad were precipitately urging 
him to join the Revolution. But, in spite of all these efforts, Salar Jung would not move. So, on the 12th of June 1857, Hyderabad assumed a more terrible form. On that day, 
proclamations signed by important Moulvies began to adorn the walls; Revolutionary 
handbills were seen everywhere in heaps; there were crowded meetings of Moslems in the 
Mosque and violent Revolutionary lecturers bound the people by oaths to drive the Kaffir 
369 
Britishers out of the land! Still, Salar Jung would not move; nay, he even arrested some of the 
popular leaders and handed them over to the British authorities! Therefore, towards the evening of the 17th of July, the city of Hyderabad actually rose and ran with shouts of “Din, 
Din!” to release their imprisoned leaders and, following the flag signifying independence, 
rushed at the British Residency. The Rohilla Sepoys of the Nizam’s own army and about five 
hundred of townsmen actually began a battle. Under these circumstances, Hyderabad felt 
assured that, though Salar Jung would not openly join them, he would secretly sympathise 
with them, as other States had done, or at least that he would not join the side of the British. 
But Salar Jung disappointed them in every particular; he did not remain indifferent, but 
joined the Britisher and helped to slaughter the soldiers of his own state. In the skirmish, the 
Revolutionary leader, Torabaz Khan, was killed and Moulvie Alla-ud-din fell into hands of 
the enemy. Soon he was despatched to the Andaman islands, and the efforts of Hyderabad 
thus came to an disastrous end. The English historian frankly admits: “For three months, the 
fate of India was in the hand of Afzul-ud-daulah and Salar Jung. Their wise policy proved 
that they preferred the certrain position of a protected state to the doubtful chances of a 
resuscitation of the Delhi monarchy under the auspices of revolted Sepoys.” 
Though the Nizam thus foiled the Revolution in the south, the young Hindu Raja of Zorapur, 
near the Nizam’s territories, resolved to stake his everything in the War of Independence. 
Accordingly, he began by collecting an army of Arabs, Rohillas, and Pathans. Nana’s 
Revolutionary messengers came to him and prepared him to fight under the flag of the 
Peshwas. The Brahmins and Moulvies of Raichur and Arcot also encouraged him in his 
plans. Not merely that, but, when he would not rise as soon as the people wanted him to, they 
– his own subjects – began to abuse him as cowardly and effiminate. Then he began the 
Revolution in the name of the Peshwas. The Nizam and the English together marched against 
him. From the moment he heard this, he knew his fate was sealed. Not being able to hold his 
own against the combined forces of the Nizam and the English, the young Raja went to 
Hyderabad itself about the month of February, 1858. While walking about there in the 
nazaars, he was arrested by Salar Jung’s orders and handed over to the British! This Raja was 
from his childhood on very intimate terms with Meadows Taylor and used to call him by the 
familiar name of “Appa.” Therefore the English authorities sent Meadows Taylor to the 
prison to find out from the Raja the secrets of the Revolutionary conspiracy and the names of 
the prominent leaders. There, as he was awaiting death, the Raja was very pleased to see 
Meadows Taylor and embraced him heartily. But when Taylor began to ask him some 
370 account of the Secret Society and as to how he got mixed up with it, to put in Taylor’s own 
words, “He drew himself very proudly and replied haughtily – ‘No Appa, I will never tell 
that! You ask me to go to see the Resident but I won’t do that either. Perhaps he hopes that I 
will beg him for my life, but, Appa, I do not wish to live, like a coward, on charity, nor will I 
ever disclose the names of my countrymen!’ ” Meadows Taylor went up to him once again 
and, showing him hopes of a pardon, suggested that he should disclose the story of the plot. 
Again, the Raja replied, “I shall tell everything else about my proceedings in this affair. But if 
they ask me the names of those who incited me to rise, I will not tell that. What? Should I, 
now ready to enter the jaws of death, should I betray the names of my own countrymen? No, 
no! Cannon, gallows, the region beyond the black waters – none of them is as terrible as 
treachery!” Meadows Taylor then informed hin that death awaited him with certainty. The 
Raje replied, “But, I have one request, Appa; do not hang me, for I am not a thief. Blow me 
from a cannon. Just see how calmly I can stand before its mouth!” 
However, through the intervention of Meadows Taylor, the sentence of this patriotic young 
Raja was reduced from death to some years’ transportation. A short time afterwards, when 
about a leave for the Andamans, the Raja took a piston belonging to one of his English 
warders and, at a moment when no one was near, shot himself dead. He had previously said, 
“I prefer death to transportation! Prison and transportation? The meanest mountaineer of my 
subjects will not remain io gaol- what then of me, their king?”4 
One of the men who had intimate and constant connection with the Raja of Zorapur was 
Bhaskar Rao Baba Sahib, the chief of Nargund. But, when Zorapur rose, Bhaskar Rao 
hesitated and was not sure if the proper time had arrived; he only rose when the former was 
completely crushed. On account of these lax, spasmodic, and inopprtune risings in the south, 
no one was crowned with success. Baba Sahib was a cultured man and a great lover of 
learning. He had also collected together a large library of excellent books. His young wife 
was as spirited as she was beautiful and had resolved upon giving her whole life for the 
descruction of the Feringhis since the time she was refused the right of adoption. It was due to her inspiration that, at last, on the 25th of may, 1858, after long hesitation, Nargund openly 
rose and declared war with England. Baba Sahib threw off the yoke of slavery to the British 
obstentatiously. When the news came that the English officer, Monson, was marching against 
him, Baba Sahib took a few select men with him and surprised Monson at night in the woods 
near Nargund. In the skirmish, Monson was killed, his body was thrown in a fire near by, and 
371 
his head was taken back triumphantly to Nargund. Next morning, it was hanging on the walls 
of Nargund. In the meanwhile, Baba Sahib’s step-brother nor only refused to join the 
Revolution but actually joined the English side. AN English army then marched upon 
Nargund and defeated the army of Baba Sahib who himself escaped from the field. He was caught, a few days later, in disguise and hanged on the 12th of June. His young, beautiful, and 
daring Ranee did not surrender to the enemy, but in company with her mother-in-law 
committed suicide by throwing herself in the waters of the Malaprabha. 
Besides these, Bhima Rao of Komaldrug, the Bhils of Khandesh and their valiant spouses, 
armed with bow and arrow, and other small communities, organised risings in Maharashtra of 
greater or less magnitude. But on account of the want of skill in choosing the proper time, on 
account of unripeness of preparation, and on account of the loose and spasmodic nature of the 
risings and their want of co-operation, the English had not to bear any severe strain in the 
souch and could devote, practically, all their resources to the north. 
4. Meadows Taylor’s Story of my life. 
After having thus taken a bird’s-eye view of the affairs in the south, it is now high time that 
we should turn our eyes to take a last glance at the proud Ayodhya which is left groaning 
there was the end of the life history of the heroic Moulview Ahmad Shah. 
In the case of extraordinary brilliant heroes like Moulvie Ahmad Shah, their death is as noble 
and as extraordinary as their life. Others may die when they are killed in battle, but one 
whose very soul is on fire with a burning patriotism and who is dancing on the battle-field 
with shouts of “Blood! Blood!” in order to quench that fire, knows no death; even if such a 
patriot falls in battle before his third for revenge is slaked, he does not die! Though the head 
was cut off, it has been seen, as a matter of fact, that the trunk of heroic men continued the 
fight in the field, and there is a belief that when even this latter is cut to pieces their 
disembodied spirits harass the enemy at night. 
There is, indeed, a philosophic truth underlying such superstitions. While Moulvie Ahmad 
Shah was still fighting, Lord Canning had published a proclamation to let the whole of Oudha 
know : “Those who will voluntarily lay down their arms will not be considered as rebels and 
372 
will be granted a free and complete pardon for their past actions, and those who help us now 
will receive back their lands and Vatans. Now that the British power has triumphed over the 
rebellion, if some still insist upon their resistance to the British government, they shall all be 
most severely punished for this unwarrantable pertinacity.” After such a proclamation and 
after many of the leaders had died suddenly one after the other, the English naturally thought 
that the people of Oudh would soon calm down. And to add to the misfortunes of Oudh, on the 5th of June, 1958, the news came that the villain, Powen, had assassinated the venerable 
Moulvie of Fyzabad. But instead of indulging in vain lamentations for the death of this sacred 
Moulvie, exhausted as she was by almost superhuman efforts, dispirited by defeat, and with 
surrender tempting her with the hope of pardon, Oudh rose suddenly at his death- spell like 
one possessed, and jumped up in blood, with shouts of “Revenge!” The base enemy hanged 
the Moulvie’s body in the Chowdi – but his spirit, his ghost, began to fight with the English 
on the field! His ghose, in order to satisfy its unquenched thirst, jumped at the neck of the 
English power, in its terrible unhuman form. Instead of being cowed down by his death, the 
whole of Oudh, the living ghost, ran up to the battle-field again with fresh vigour brushing 
aside all thoughts of strength and weakness, success and defeat, hope and despair, life and 
death! To take revenge for the hanging of the Moulvie, Nizam Ali Khan marched up to 
Pilibht; Khan Bahadur Khan with four thousand men ran to the field of action; the 
Farrukabad men rose taking five thousand followers; Vilayat Shah took three thousand men 
to the field and, with five thousand men, Nana Sahib, Bala Sahib, Ali Khan Mewati, and 
other leaders started a tremendous campaign in Rohilkhand and Oudh. Seeing these great 
masses of troops marching in haste, and thirsting for his blood, the cowardly traitor of Powen 
began to shudder with terror. The English immediately despatched troops for his protection. 
Around that part, the Revolutionaries were engaging in frequent and despaerate encounters 
with the enemy. On the other side, at Chowk Ghat, on the banks of the Ghogra, the Begum 
and Sirdar Mamu Khan had established the headquarters of their army. Besides these, Raja 
Ram Baksh, Bahunath Singh, Canda Singh, Gulab Singh, Bhopal Singh, Hanumant Singh, 
and other prominent and valiant Zedmindars, with larger or smaller armies, were fighting to 
reconquer Oudh, which had been almost conquered by the English. Also, the celebrated 
Mogul prince Feroze Shah, who was lately fighting at Dhar, was now in Oudh. There was 
also there fighting in Oudh the famous Raja Narapat Singh, the valiant son of a valiant father. 
He it was who had so bravely defended the fortress of Ruiya. His father, Jussa Singh, was an 
intimate friend of Nana Sahib and had died at Brahmavarta while fighting on the side of Nana 
Sahib in the holy War of Independence. Narapat Singh, like a true Ksharia, unsheathed the 
sword again for victory in the field in which his father lay dead; he gave shelter to Nana 
373 
Sahib in his fortress at Ruiya; and he had been fighting even since then against the Feringhi 
power. And even greater than all these, in power, in spirit, in determination, and in 
patriotism, the veteran Raja Veni Madhav also now left his fort and, with an extraordinary 
bold move, after marching along the Cawnpore road, was now ready to pounce upon 
Lucknow! When those who have left all hopes of success fight only for honour and duty, 
even courting death, is there any limit to their magnificent courage? Simply for the honour of 
the Kshatriya race, this Veni Madhav, though without the slightest hope of success at this late 
hour, marched straight upon Lucknow! And he caused placards to be posted in the town that 
all Indians residing there should leave it, for he was going to direct a tremendous attack upon 
the Feringhis. The Feringhis, though drunk with victory, and possessed of force, and good 
organisation, were astounded at his marvellous courage. An attach on Lucknow? Forsooth, as 
if the war had begun only to-day, as if seas of blood had not at all flowed for the whole of the 
past year in Oudh! 
So, on the 13th of June, Hope Grant directed a surprise assault upon the Revolutionaries, 
gathering together at Nabobganj near Lucknow. The surprise attack of the white and the 
black forces of Hope Grant would naturally have dispersed the incautious Revolutionaries at 
once – but, Sepoys, stop! It is not yet a week since the Moulvie was killed – so, stop! They 
stopped and they stood up ready to give battle even under such odds. And, lo! Such an 
exhibition of bravery was seen on the side of the Revolutionaries as is rarely witnessed no 
matter anywhere. It was such as to make the usually spiteful enemy to be carried away by a 
natural admiration of heroic bravery. The English general, Hope Grant, writes :- “Still, their 
attacks were vigorous, if unsuccessful, and we had much ado to repel them. A largebody of 
fine, daring Zemindari men brought two guns in the open and attacked us in the year. I have 
seen many battles in India and many brave fellows fighting with a determination to conquer 
or die; but, I never witnesses anything more magnificent than the conduct of these 
Zemindars! In the first instance they attacked Hodson’s horse, who would not face them and 
by their unsteadiness placed in great jeopardy two guns which had been attached to the regiment. I ordered up the 7th Hussars and the other four guns belonging to the battery to 
within a distance of five hundred yards from the enemy and opened a fire of grape which 
mowed them down with a terrible effect like thistles before the scythe. Their chief, a big 
fellow with a goitre on his neck, nothing daunted, caused two green standards to be placed 
close to their guns and used them as a rallying point. But our grapefire was so destructive that 
whenever they attempted to save their pieces, they were struck down. Two squadrons and 
more now came up to our side and forced the survivors to retire, waving the swords and 
374 
spears at us and defiantly calling out to us to come on. Around the two guns alone there were one hundred and twentyfive corpses! After three hours’ fighting, the day was ours.”5 
Such desperate encounters took place in East Oudh, in Middle Oudh, in North Oudh and, 
practically, all over Oudh. And that not with the enemy alone but with traitors like Man Singh 
and Powenkar who had been lured to join the enemy by the proclamation of pardon. Oudh 
began to fight such a double battle. They directed attacks on Powen; they were fighting 
towards Lucknow; they fought at Sultanpur; they shut up the traitor Man Singh in his fort; 
they obstructed English routes; they sacked English stations; and, by their noble sacrifice they 
made every space of the ground there worth worshipping as sacred soil! Cutting the cordon 
which the English drew round them, the patriots rushed about from place to place still 
persevering in their cry for war and revenge. Considerations of space alone forbid us from 
minutely following all their movements. 
5. Hope Grant’s Incidents of the Sepoy War, page 292. 
Such was the terrible fight that Ayodhya fought! At last, in October, 1858, the English 
Commander-in-Chief again arranged a mass of white and brown troops in systematic order, 
made them march simultaneously from all sides against the Revolutionaries and, thus 
pressing them on all sides, gave orders to push them northwards towards Nepal. Still, Oudh 
would not be exhausted and would not retreat a step without fighting! 
Veni Madhav’s town, Shankarpur, was surrounded on three sides by three different armies. 
He was now weak in resources and the enemy was very strong; still, Veni Madhav would not 
lay down his arms. Then, the English Commander-in-Chief himself sent him a message 
telling him that a further continuance of the fight would mean only useless bloodshed, as he 
had no hope of victory. If he surrendered, he was promised full pardon and complete 
restoration of his property. Veni Madhav replied: “ It being henceforth impossible to defend 
the fort, I am going to leave it. But I will never surrender myself to you. For my person belongs not to me but to my king.” The fort will surrender, but not Veni Madhav!6 
375 
In November, 1959, the famous proclamation of the Queen of England was published 
throughout India, and according to the prophecy, the Company’s rule did vanish after a 
hundred years! But, in its place came the rule of the Queen! Everyone who fought openly 
against the English in the war was to be given a full pardon as soon as he laid down his arms; 
6. How the people fought pro rege and pro patria, for the king and the Motherland, 
will be seen from the following. Charles Ball says :- “After the proclamation, still the 
struggle in Oudh was wonderful, and all these bands of rebels were strengthened and 
encouraged to an inconceivable degree by the sympathy of their countrymen. They could 
march without commissariat, for the people would always feed them. They could leave their 
baggage without guard, for the people would not attack it. They were always certain of their 
position and that of the British, for the people brought them hourly information. And no 
design could be possibly kept from them while secret sympathisers stood round every mess- 
table and waited in almost every tent in the British camp. No surprise could be effected but 
by a miracle, while rumous, communicated from mouth to mouth, outstripped even our 
cavalry.” Vol.II, page 572. 
a promise was given that his property would not be confiscated7; not even an enquiry was to 
be held. The right to Rajas to adopt an heir was recognised. A clause was also inserted that 
the religious beliefs of the people would never be interfered with; and an undertaking was 
given that promises would not thenceforth be broken. 
The Queen proceeded to say : “And we do hereby confirm in their several offices, civil and 
military, all persons now employed in the service of the Honourable East India Company, 
subject to our future pleasure, and to such laws and regulations as may hereafter be enacted. 
“We hereby announce to the native princes of India that all treaties and engagements made 
with them by or under the authority of the Honourable East India Company are by us 
accepted and will be scrupulously maintained; and we look for the like observance on their 
part. 
376 
“We desire no extension of our present territorial possessions; and, while we will permit no 
aggressions upon our dominious or our rights to be attempted with impunity, we shall 
7. How this promise and similar promises were kept by the English, is well-known to 
the people of India. The Government actually refused to return lakhs of Rupees lent to them 
on bonds and securities on the ground that the security-holders were rebels. Here is a sample 
of the general attitude of the English people at the time. In the biography of John Delane, the 
famous editor of the London Times, recently printed, we get some glimpses of the matter. At 
about the time of the mutiny, the Times had sent a special correspondent to India in the 
person of Sir W.H. Russell. It is recorded that “at the end of January, 1859, Sir W.H.Russell 
was still with Lord Clyde and, in one of his last letters from Lucknow, he tells a delightful 
story which he heard from the Commander-in-Chief. Alluding to his landlord at Allahabad 
(an Anglo-Indian general merchant), Lord Clyde said, ‘you doubtless heard what he did?’ 
‘No’. ‘Well, he was much in debt to native merchants when the mutiny broke out. He was 
appointed special commissioner and the first thing he did was to hand all his creditors.” This 
‘delightful story’, is not, of course, contained in any ‘history of the Indian mutiny.’ It was not 
even contained in the Times’ special correspondednts’ letters to the Times intended for 
publication. It was mentioned only in private letter of Sir W.H.Russel to John Delane. 
sanction no encroachment on those of others. We shall respect the rights, dignity, and honour 
of native princes as our own, and we desire that they, as well as our own subjects, should 
enjoy that prosperity and that social advancement which can only be secured by internal 
peace and good government. 
“We hold ourselves bound to the natives of our Indian territories by the same obligations of 
duty which bind us to all our other subjects; and those obligations, by the blessing of 
Almighty God, we shall faithfully and conscientiously fulfil. 
“And it is out further will that, so far as may be, our subjects, of whatever race or creed, be 
freely and impartially admitted to offices in our service, the duties of which they may be 
qualified by their education, ability, and integrity, duly to discharge. 
377 
“Our clemency will be extended to all offencers, save and except those who have been and 
shall be convicted of having directly taken part in the murder of British subjects. 
“To all others in arms against the Government, we hereby promise unconditional pardon, 
amnesty, and oblivion of all offences against outselves, our crown, and dignity, on their 
return to their homes and peaceful pursuits.” 
In such a manner was this ‘Magna Charta’ (?) of Hindusthan published! The principal reason 
for its publication was, no doubt, the desire to extinguish the Revolution in Oudh. But Oudh 
did not care even to glance at it. The Begum of Oudh published the following counter- 
proclamation: “In the proclamation, it is written that all the contracts and agreements entered 
into by the Company will be accepted by the queen. Let the people carefully observe this 
artifice. The Company has seized on the whole of Hindusthan, and if this arrangement be 
accepted, what is there new in it? The Company professed to treat the Chief of Bharatpur as a 
son and then took his territory. The chief of Lahore was carried off to London, never to return 
again. The Nabob Shams-ud-din Khan, on the one hand, they hanged, while, on the other 
hand, they salaamed to him. The Peshwa they expelled from Poona and Satara and 
imprisoned for life in Bithoor. The Raja of Benares they imprisoned in Agra. They have left 
no names or traces of the chiefs of Behar, Orissa, and Bengal. Out ancient possessions they took from us on pretence of distributing pay and, in the 7th article of the treaty, they wrote on 
oath that they would take no more from us. If, then, the arrangements made by the Company 
are to be accepted, what is the difference between the former and the present state of things? 
These are old affairs. But even recently, in defiance of oaths and treaties, and notwithstanding 
that they owed us millions of Rupees, without reason and on pretences of misconduct and the 
discontent of our people, they took our country and property worth millions of Rupees. If our 
people were discontended with our royal predecessor, Wajid Ali Shah, how comes it then, 
that they are content with us? And no ruler ever experienced such loyalty and devotion of life 
and goods as we have. What, then, is wanting that they do not restore to us our country? 
Further, it is written, in the proclamation, that they want no increase of territory, and yet they 
cannot refrain from annexation. If the Queen has assumed the government, why does she not 
restore our country to us when the people have unmistakably shown their wish to this effect? 
“It is well known that no king or queen ever punished a whole army or a whole people for 
rebellion. All will be gorgiven, for the wise cannot approve of punishing the whole army and 
378 
people of Hindusthan and also they know that so long as the word “punishment” remains, the 
disturbance will not be suppressed. There is a well-known proverb, “Marta kya nahin karta.” 
“It is written in the proclamation, that they who harboured the rebels or who caused men to 
rebel shall have their lives, but that punishment shall be awarded after deliberation to them, 
that murderers and abettors of murderers shall have no mercy shown to them, and that all the 
rest shall be forgiven. Now even a silly person will see that, under this proclamation, no one, 
be he guilty or innocent, can escape. Everything is written and yet nothing is written. But one 
thing they have clearly said, and that is that they shall let off no one who is implicated; and 
so, in whatever village or province our army has halted, the inhabitants of that place cannot 
escape. Deeply are we concerned for the condition of our beloved people on reading this 
proclamation which palpably teems with enmity. We now issue a distinct order, and 
trustworthy, that all persons who may have foolishly presented themselves as heads of villages to the English shall, before the 1st of January, 1859, present themselves in our camp. 
No doubt their faults shall be forgiven. To believe in this Proclamation, it is only necessary to 
remember that Hindusthanee rulers are altogether have heard this. No one has ever seen the 
English have forgiven an offence. 
“In this proclamation it is written that when peace is restored, public works such as roads and 
canals, will be made in order to improve the condition of the people! It is worthy of a little 
reflection, that they have promised no better employment for Hindusthanees than the making 
of roads and the digging of canals! 
“If people cannot see clearly what this means, then, there is no hope for them. 
“Let no subject be deceived by the proclamation!” 
And therefore Oudh would not take advantage of the unconditional amnesty granted therein. 
She was still waiving her sword, riding on horseback, fighting on the field, bathing in blood, 
and leaping into the fire of sacrifice! She wanted freedom or war to the end. She was more 
used to jump at the neck than fall at the feet of the enemy. She was still on the battle-field of 
Shankarpur, Dhundiakhera, Rai Bareilly, Sitapur. She was killing, she was dying, but still she 
fought on! 
379 
So sought Oudh from June to November of 1858, from November to December, until April 
of 1859, when she was pushed from all sides towards Nepal. When the Revolutionaries 
entered Nepal, the English were still in hot pursuit; but still there was one hope – will the 
Hindu Raja of Nepal protect them? 
At this time, the number of Revolutionaries who entered Nepal was about sixty thousand; 
they were led by Nana Sahib, Bala Sahib, the Begum and her young son, and others. Jung 
Bahadur of Nepal wrote at this time a letter to them. The reply which Nana Sahib sent to him 
is so pointed and sarcastic that we cannot help quoting at least a part of it. It runs to this 
effect:- “We have received your letter. We have been hearing the reputation of Nepal at 
distant places, all along the country. Indeed, in spite of my reading the history of many 
ancient kings of India and seeing the character of many present rulers, I believe that your 
Majesty’s deeds stand matchless! For you did not hesitate to render help even to the British – 
the very people who have borne every sort of ill-will towards your people. And yet, as soon 
as they asked for help you have rushed to their assistance! There is no limit to this your 
generosity! Well then, shall it be unnatural of me to expect that the descendant of the Peshwa 
who had all along been friendly towards your people will not be denied help from your 
Majesty, especially when you have given it so freely to the British who bore avowed enmity 
towards you? He who admitted the enemy inside will not at least turn his friend out! It is 
utterly unnecessary to repeat here the well-known story of the wrongs under which 
Hindusthan is groaning, how the British people have broken treaties, trampled down their 
promises, snatched away the crowns of the Indian Rajas. It is equally unnecessary to describe 
how even the religion of the land is threatened as soon as the kingdoms of the land are 
destroyed. It is too well known. It is for this reason that this war is wages. We are sending Shrimant Bala Sahib, our brother, to you, and he will clear up other things personally.”8 
The letter was sealed with the royal seal of the Peshwas and sent to Jung Bahadur. After this 
letter, many consultations followed. Jung Bahadur sent one of his noblemen, Colonel 
Balbhadra Singh, to see personally the leaders of the Revolutionaries. The leaders told him 
unanimously, “We have fought for the Dharma of the Hindus. Maharaja Jung Bahadur too is 
a Hindu and therefore should help us. If he gives his help, even if he orders his officers to 
lead us, we shall again dash on Calcutta. We shall feed ourselves, and shall obey his orders. 
Whatever country we conquer in fight will become the possession of the Gurkha 
Government. If this is not possible, at least let him give us asylum in his country and we will 
live under his orders.” Colonel Balbhadra Singh, the Gurkha representative, said : “The 
380 English have opened wide the door of mercy. So, throw down your arms before the British 
and go to their asylum.” They replied : “We have heard of the proclamation. But we have no 
wish that some of our brothers should have their lives at the expenses of others. Maharaja 
Jung is a Hindu and we do not want to fight against the Gurkhas. If he wants, we shall throw 
down our arms before him, and even if we are to be murdered, we submit unresistingly. But 
how can we submit to the British by risking some of our own brethren to their vengeance?” 
Many such consultations took place, but at last Jung Bahadur finally told the Revolutionaries 
that if he had wanted to help them he would not have sent his men to massacre them at 
Lucknow! Nay, he did not stop merely with sending this mean and cruel reply. He gave full 
permission to the English to enter Nepal and hunt the Revolutionaries within his territories! 
Then the Revolutionaries lost all hope, hid their arms, and quietly began to walk away to their 
homes. To encourage them in doing so, the English did not give them the slightest trouble for 
their past hostile attitude. Still, some grand-souled heroes, unable to bear the sight of the 
Britisher again treading the sacred soil of India, instead of returning to their homes, escaped 
to the jungles, knowing that it meant nothing short of dying by starvation! About that time, 
Nana Sahib wrote a letter to the British commander, Hope Grant. What does he say in that 
8. Charles Ball’s Indian Mutiny, Vol.II. 
letter – any talk of surrender? Oh, no! After condemning at great length the unjust rule of the 
British in India, Nana asks : “What right have you to occupy India and declare me an outlaw? 
Who gave you the right to rule over India? What! You, Feringhis, are the kings, and we, 
thieves, in this our own country?” These are the last recorded words of Nana Sahib. No! This 
is the last challenge of the Peshwa throne of Balaji Viswanath! It is strong, proud, just, and 
self-respecting, worthy of the last descendant of Shivaji’s Peshwas. The stain of effeminacy 
of the secondBaji Rao was washed away in streams of the blood of the foreign foe, and the 
Gadi of the Peshwas passes away from the scene, like the Chitore Rajputanees of old, 
struggling, fighting, and burning amidst the leaping flames of the fire of sacrifice. This was 
hedr last shriek – “In India, foreigners are kings and the sons of Hindusthan thieves!” 
381 
History does not know for certain what happened to Nana Sahib after the episode of this 
letter. Bala Sahib died in the forest in circumstances of self-imposed misery. The Begum and 
her young son were, later on, given shelter by Jung Bahadur. The great martyr Gujaran Singh 
died in one of the numerous skirmishes in the last stages of the war. 
Thus ended the National Revolution of 1857, in Oudh. Nowhere in the world has a country 
fought for its independence with more stubborn bravery. 
Malleson says: “They (the people of Outh) joined in the revolt inaugurated by their brethren 
the Sepoys – the majority of them Oudh men – and fought for independence. 
Howpertinaciously they wages the contest has been told in these pages. No other part of India 
gave an example of a resistance so determined, so prolonged, as did Oudh. Throughout the 
struggle, the sense of the injustice perpetrated in 1856 steeled the hearts of its people and 
strengthened their resolution. If on some occasion they too precipitately fled, it was in the 
hope of renewing the struggle with some chances of success another day. When, finally, the 
sweep made over Oudh by Lord Clyde forced the remnant of the fighting flass to take refuge 
in the jungles of Nepal, the survivors often preferred starvation to surrender. The agricultural 
population, the Talukdars, the landowners, the traders, accepted the defeat when, after that 
long struggle, they felt that it was final.”9 
9. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, page 207. 
CHAPTER-II THE CULMINATING OFFERING IN THE SACRIFICIAL FIRE 
ON the 20th of June, 1858, in the fierce fight on the maidan at Gwalior, Ranee Lakshmi Bai 
of Jhansi fell. But though one inveterate enemy of the English was thus taken away from the 
scene, the other, equally inveterate and, perhaps, more skilful in the tactics of war, had effected a clever retreat. He disappeared from Gwalior on the 20th, he disappeared, also, from the field of Jaura Alipur on the 22nd, and away he went out to the reach of the English – but 
where? 
382 
In a few days, all over central India, forests, cities, caves, villages, mountains, and rivers, 
reverberated with a terrible war-cry, and jubiliant shouts of “Tatia Tope, Tatia Tope!” 
For the Mahratta tiger, chased by the lances of the hunters, had now rushed into the forests of 
Central India. He had, as it were, lost his right hand by the death of Lakshmi Bai on the field 
of Gwalior. The Revolution was almost crushed by numerous defeats. He was now separated 
for ever from Nana Sahib. English power, through Indian strength, had now almost become 
invincible. He had now no army worth the name, no guns, no provisions, and not even any 
hopes for getting these anywhere! Still the undaunted Tatia Tope, harassing the enemy, and 
maddening Defeat itself, would not surrender the Jaripatka at the feet of the foreigner. Bend 
it before the foreigner, never! Such is the tree from which its staff is made that it might be 
broken by foreigners but it would hever bend before them! 
After the defeats of Gwalior and Jaura Alipur, Tatia Tope and Rao Sahib Peshwa took the 
remnants of the army and marched to a place called Sarmathura. They based all their future 
operations on three important principles. First, they were to try not to get entangled into any 
battle whatsoever with the English army. Secondly, they decided to make guerilla raids in the 
unguarded provinces. But these two stratagems would be impossible unless some means 
could be devised to insure a supply of provisions and good arms. So, to obtain these, the third 
rule of Tatia was to levy contributions of provisions, money, and arms, wherever an Indian 
state was to be found. In northern and central India, there are Indian states at almost every 
step. They had accumulated, in the course of years, huge stores of provisions and arms. And 
it was the duty of the kings there to use these stores for the protection of the country. But in 
1857 these kings disregarded the earnest requests and entreaties of the country and their own 
subjects. They would not openly join the Revolutionaries, because they were possessed by 
the sinful motive of looking to their own personal and individual gain. Was the Swadeshi 
army to starve while these selfish states had hoarded provisions lying uselessly in their 
stores? To remedy such a tragic state of affairs, Tatia Tope and Rao Sahib hit upon the 
marvellous and just plan of snatching away from these unfaithful custodians, the means that 
were necessary for the defence of the country. This plan would give the Revolution sufficient 
money, provisions, and arms. Thus, the cost of maintaining the army of defence would not 
fall on the poor people of the country alone. These weak princes had generally only small 
armies, which were armies only in name, and even these more often than not sympathised 
with the Revolutionaries. Therefore, to levy contributions on these kings was not at all a hard 
383 
task. Since these states are at every step, the army need not be hindered with too much 
baggage on its marches. The army would have very little baggage to carry and, even if the 
enemy looted the provisions sometimes, if would not give rise to great inconvenience, as the 
Revolutionary army could always find an Indian State on its way and make use of the 
provisions in its stores. For all these advantages, this plan was determined upon the Tatia 
Tope. If the kings gave provisions, on demand, willingly to the Swadeshi army – and many of 
them did give them – then, well and good; if they did not, they were forced to give them, that 
was all. 
On these three principles, therefore, the future operations of Tatia Tope depended; guerilla 
warfare, never to face the enemy in the open field, and to levy contributions on the Indian 
States and exact them if they refused. Tatia’s ultimate object was to keep up such marches 
and cross the Narbada at the most favourable opportunity and thus to bring the Mahratta tiger 
to its native forests. The object of the English was not only to prevent him from crossing the 
Narbada, but not even to let him see it. And thus the race began. 
First, Tatia had his eyes on Bharatpur. But, hearing that a strong English army had come 
there, he suddenly veered round a Jeypore. In the Jeypore Durbar, there were many people 
belonging to Tatia’s party, and the army and the populace were also on his side. So, Tatia 
sent his messengers to that Durbar and intimated to his men to be ready. But the English got 
news of this quickly and an English army immediately marched to Jeypore from Nasirabad. 
When the Jeypore plan thus fell through, Tatia descended towards the south. Here Colonel 
Holmes and an army pursued him. Suddenly, Tatia outwitted his pursuers and marched at 
once on the state of Tonk. The Nabob of the place shut himself up in the town and sent some 
select sepoys of his with four guns to engage with Tatia outside the walls. Now the battle 
would have begun, but suddenly the Tonk sepoys began to embrace Tatia’s men in brotherly 
affection. They also handed over the four guns to Tatia, and in this manner Tatia got new 
troops, new guns, and fresh provisions, and continued his determined march to the south! 
Tatia came right up to Indragarh and made a halt there. Behind him was Holmes, and on his 
flank was Roberts coming from Rajputana. At that time, it was raining tremendously and the 
Chambal was in front. The enemy behind and the unfordable Chambal in front! So, Tatia 
turned north-east towards Bundi, and after brilliant and strategic marches came up to the 
province of Neemuch-Nasirabad which had risen in favour of the Revolution. Tatia 
encamped for rest near a village called Bhilwada. Hearing of this, Roberts came there 
384 
hurriedly from Sarwargaon and fell on Tatia on the 7th of August, 1858. After keeping him 
back all day, as soon as night fell, Tatia took his army including his guns safely to Kotra, 
within the dominions of Udaipur. While the army was resting there at night, Tatia went for 
worship in the temple of Shri Krishna at the famous place of pilgrimage near by, called 
Nathadwara. He returned to the camp at midnight and heard that the English army had come 
up close to them in pursuit. He at once gave orders to the army to break the camp and march 
on. But the army was so tired that the infantry replied blungly, “We cannot march a step till 
to-morrow morning. Let the cavalry go in front.” Under these circumstances Tatia was 
obliged to give battle. As soon as it was dawn, Tatia arranged his troops as well as he could under the circumstances. In that battle, on the 14th of August, after some sharp fighting, 
Tatia’s troops were routed and retreated about fifteen miles, leaving their guns behind. Now 
again Tatia was without guns, without provisions, and with an elated enemy in hot pursuit! 
So, avoiding the enemy at his back, he suddenly darted off, again, towards the river Chambal. 
The English armies followed him not only in his rear and flank but one English commander 
stood in front at the very banks of the Chambal. But Tatia put some on the wrong scent, 
eluded some, pushed back some, and thus, by clever marches, he came up to the Chambal 
and, almost under the nose of the English army waiting there, crossed that river! 
Now it is true that the Chambal was between Tatia and the English pursuing forces. But then, 
he had no guns, no provisions, no money – and Narbada, he could not yet even think of it! He 
was thus beset with tremendous difficulties, and therefore he marched straight on 
Jhalrapattan. On seeing this, the loyal chief of the State took his faithful troops and his big 
guns and fell upon Tatia. But, as soon as Tatia was in sight the forces of the State began to 
salaam him as their Malik! Immediately, Tatia took these troops under his command. In 
Jhalrapattan, he got cavalry horses, waggons, and plenty of provisions. He went there without 
a single gun and he had now got thirty-two guns! The Rao Sahib Peshwa ordered the Raja to 
pay twenty-five lakhs of Rupees as fine. The Raja pleaded for mercy and, at last, it was 
agreed that he should pay fifteen lakhs. Tatia was in this place for five days. He distributed 
pay to the army at the rate of thirty Rupees a month to every cavalry-soldier and twelve to 
every infantry-man. Afterwards Rao Sahib, Tatia, and the Nabob of Bhanda began to 
deliberate upon their future plan of action in the south. The chief aim of the Peshwa army was 
to cross the Narbada and enter the Deccan. To oppose this, the English had woven nets of 
different armies and were guarding well nigh every outlet. But Tatia had now acquired thirty- 
two guns, a new army, new provisions and money, and was better prepared to continue the 
385 
struggle. So he silently whispered to his companions, “Now the next move must be on 
Indore!” 
This brilliant idea was quite in accordance with Tatia’s daring. With not so much as one 
regular regiment in his hand, he had created new armies, new crowns, and new kingdoms. To 
a man of such magical talent, the plan of marching to Indore was not impossible to execute. It 
is the duty of the chief, Holkar, to help his master, the Peshwa. If he were not to do it 
willingly, service should be exacted from him by the Peshwa. The Indore army had secretly 
pledged itself to support Tatia. Even the Indore Durbar was secretly sending invitations to 
him! Therefore, Tatia decided to play his game. He marched hastily from Pattan towards the 
south, rushed into Malwa, and appeared suddenly at Rajgarh! 
Now, in pursuit of Tatia, there were marching, from different directions, the English 
commanders, Roberts, Holmes, Parke, Mitchell, Hope and Lockhart. All of them were thrown 
into consternation when they heard that Tatia was marching upon Indore. One moved from 
Mhow; one ran towards Nalkhera; one hesitated whether he should go to Raigarh or not. 
General Mitchell had just, with infinite difficulty, ascended a hill with his army, whe he saw 
Tatia just descending on the other side. But the English army was so tired that it could hardly 
go forth a step further. So it rested for a while; Tatia took advantage of it and continued his 
march. He was not tired! The next day, Mitchell recommenced the pursuit and at last came 
upon Tatia. The Revolutionaries were in their turn tired of the marches and prepared to give 
battle. They numbered at the time about five thousand and had about thirty guns. But the 
most wonderful thing is that, as soon as about one thousand of the English fell upon them, 
before even much blood was shed, they began to retreat, leaving their guns behind! It is on 
such occasions that we notice the difference between the guerilla tactics of Kumar Singh and 
of Tatia Tope. The latter’s army did not take advantage of the opportunities that came in their 
way to deviate from the rule of not fighting an open battle with the English. 
Leaving the maidan at Raigarh behind, Tatia’s army entered into the forest on the banks of 
the river Betwa and came out on the other side, at a place called Siranj. At Siranj, Tatia got 
four guns again. The English army could not move for some time on account of an excessive 
fall of rain. And so Tatia got some time to rest his troops. He therefore let his army rest for a 
week. At the end of the week, he marched again to the north. The town of Isagarh, in the 
Scindia’s dominions, would not give him any provisions; so, it was taken by assault and Tatia 
again got eight guns. This was all right, but the Narbada was thus being left further behind. It 
386 
appeared that the Mahratta lion could not get into his mountain cave on account of the 
numerous Englis lances blocking his way. While so many English armies are after one man, why talk of the Narbada?1 
1. An English writer says : “Then commenced that marvellous series of retreats 
which, continued for ten months, seemed to mock at defeat, and made Tatia’s name more 
familiar to Europe than that of most of our Anglo-Indian generals. The problem before him 
was not an easy one. He had to keep together an army of beaten Asiatics bound by no tie to 
his person and bound to each other only by one common hate and one common fear – hate of 
the Britisher’s name and fear of the British gallows. He had to keep this ill-assorted army in 
constant motion at a pace which should baffle not only the enemies who pursued him but the 
enemies who streamed down at right angles to his line of march. He had, while thus urging 
his half-disciplined host to mad flight, to take some dozen cities, obtain fresh stores, collect 
new cannon and, above all, induce recruits to join voluntarily a service which promised only 
incessant flight at sixty miles a day. That he accomplished these ends with the means at his 
disposal indicates ability of no mean kind. Slightly as we may hold the marauding leader, he 
was of the class to which Haidar Ali belonged, and, had he carried out the plan attributed to 
him and penetrated through Nagpur to Madras, he might have been as formidable as his 
prototype. As it was, the Narbada proved to him what the Channel was to Napoleon. He 
could accomplish anything except cross the stream ...... These columns, which moved at first 
as slowly as British columns are accumstomed to move, learnt to march, at last; and some of 
the later marches of Brigadier Parke and Colonel Napier were equal to half of Tatia’s average 
rate. Still, he escaped; and though the hot weather and the rains, and the cold weather and the 
hot weather, again, he was still flying, sometimes with two thousand ‘dispirited’ followers 
and sometimes with fifteen thousand men!” – From The Friend of India. 
Now, the Revolutionaries divided themselves into two parts, one under Tatia and the other 
under Rao Sahib Peshwa. The two armies marched separately. But they did not give up their 
old tactics. They often eluded the enemy cleverly, got guns and lost them, fought when it was 
necessary as at Mangroli and Sindhwaha, retreated in good order after skirmishes, were 
pursued for miles and escaped successfully; and again the two armies came to-gether at 
Lalitpur. But, the Narbada was now no nearer. Nay, Tatia and Rao were, now finally, almost 
in the grip of the enemy. Mitchell from the south, Colonel Liddell and Colonel Meade from 
the east and the north, Colonel Parke from the west, Roberts from the Chambal – on all sides 
of Tatia, the enemy was closing round and narrowing the circle. Then, Rao and Tatia had a 
consultation and came suddenly to Kajuri; but there, too, was an English army. They entered 
387 
the jungles again and marched northwards up to Talbahat. So, the English thought that at last 
Tatia had given up the idea of marching to the south. But, from there, Tatia and Rao Sahib 
suddenly dashed forth, crossed the Betwa, fought a skirmish with the English at Kajuri, and 
again at Raigarh, and then marched straight to the south, now seen, now unseen. The English 
were in utter confusion at the audacity of the attempt; they ran in all directions to stop him. 
But, brushing aside and eluding these armies by extraordinary marches, this Mahratta with 
the speed of lightning, crossed ghats, forbed rivers, rushed right through forests and pushed 
straight towards the south! Parke rushed from the flank, Mitchell in the rear and Becher from 
the front, but still Tatia persisted in his wonderful southward march! There, he has come to 
the Narbada, he is on the river – and the astonished and dumbfounded world clapped its hand 
in applause! – Tatia, has, at last, crossed the Narbada! Malleson says: “It is impossible to withhold admiration from the pertinenacity with which this scheme was carried out.”2 
2. “Our very remarkable friend, Tatia Tope, is too troublesome and clever an enemy 
to be admired. Since last June he has kept Central India in a fervour. He has sacked stations, 
plundered treasuries, emptied arsenals; collected armies, lost them; fought battles, lost them; 
talen guns from native princes, lost them; taken more, lost them; then, his motions were like 
forked lightning; and for weeks, he has marched thirty and forty miles a day. He has crossed 
the Narbada to and fro; he has marched between our columns, behind them, and before them. 
Ariel was not more subtle, aided by the best stage mechanism. Up mountains, over rivers, 
through ravines and valleys, amid swamps, on he goes, backwards and forwards, and 
sideways and zig-zag ways, now falling upon a post-cart and carrying off the Bombay mails, now looting a village, headed and burned, yet evasive as Proteus” – The Times, 17th January 
1859. 
At last, a Mahratta prince had entered the Deccan with an army! When it became known that 
Tatia had crossed the Narbada near Hoshangabad and had arrived near Nagpur, not only in 
the three presidencies, not only all over India, not only in England, but all over Europe even, 
all men, including even his enemies, shouted out in applause, “Bravo, Tatia Bravo!” The whole Revolution had changed its colour at once!3 In front of him lay the Nizam’s dominions 
where he had a powerful party in the Durbar supporting him, on the other side were Poona, 
Bombay, and the whole of Maharashtra. The Jaripatka in the land of the Mahrattas – who 
knew what hidden powers might not rise from that Raigarh, from that Pawankhindi, from that 
Wargaon! The Nizam of Hyderabad, Lord Harris at Madras, Lord Elphinstone at Bombay, 
and Lord Canning at Calcutta – all were bewildered with astonishment! Such an astonishing 
388 
feat did Tatia effect in this descent into Maharashtra! But it was only astonishing; for the time 
had now gone by when it would also have been useful! A year before, this crossing of the 
Narbada would have had a wonderful effect. Now, in the October of 1858, this wonderful 
strategy would excite admiration but would not lead to success! The Revolution had by now 
been crushed in almost all placed. And the terrible bloodshed caused in the fierce struggle 
which was still fresh before its mind, had made the nation weak and stupid. In spite of this if 
the people of Nagpur had shown some perseverance, the aspect of the Revolution might have 
been changed. In the north of India, in village after village, the peasants would voluntarily 
and gladly give provisions of Tatia'’ men and look upon him with the reverence due to a 
patriotic hero -–but such was the adverse fate, that, in the country of the Mahrattas 
themselves, the people were afraid to assist him in his noble mission! What other fruits would 
the loyalty of the infamous Queen Banka bear? Undaunted, however, by this adverse 
reception of his marvellous efforts, Tatia stayed there for some time and began to think out 
the future campaign. 
3. “It was accomplished. The nephew of the man recognised by the Mahrattas as the 
heir of the last reigning Peshwa was on the Mahratta soil with an army ... The Nizam was 
loyal. But the times were peculiar.....Indstnaces had occurred before, as in the case of the 
Scindia of a people revolting against their sovereign when that sovereign acted in the teeth of 
thenational feeling. It was impossible not to fear lest the army of Tatia should rouse to arms 
the entire Mahratta population and that the spectacle of a people in arms against the foreigner 
might act with irresistible force on the people of the Deccan.” _ Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, 
Vol. V, pages, 239, 240. 
Immediately, the English armies began to march thither from all directions. The English 
were at Melghat, Asirgarh was closed to him and so were Gujrat, Khandesh, and Nagpur. The 
whole south was closed from below, while, from above, from the north, the pursuing armies 
had now crossed the Narbada and come after him. Still the invincible hero did not lose heart; 
not only this, but the unbeaten warrior effected more marvellous feats in strategic marching. 
Keeping in check as far as possible the armies that were now encircling him, looting mails, 
breaking telegraphs, surprising outposts, Tatia marched straight to the source of the Narbada. 
Why? He had, now, actually set his heart upon Baroda! All the fords of the Narbada were 
watched by English armies on both sides of the river. Still, Tatia came to a village, called 
Kargun, to cross the river there. There he came across the English commandant Major 
389 
Sunderland. The armies approached and a battle began. In the heat of the battle, Tatia ordered 
all his guns to be left behind, jumped into the Narbada, and was soon on the other side with 
his men. On this occasion, Tatia and his men, indeed, performed one of the most wonderful 
feats ever recorded in the history of warfare, in the rapid marches which they effected. 
Malleson clearly says, “Now that the guns were lost, his men were able to display that 
capacity for rapid marching in which the natives of India are unsurpassed, I might almost say 
unequalled, by any troops in the world.” Even in the midst of all this hurry and danger, Tatia 
continued his march straight towards Baroda. At Baroda, in the Durbar and in the army, the 
party which completely sided with Nana Sahib’s policy was powerful, and the Gaekwar’s 
troops were only waiting for Tatia’s arrival to join him openly. Tatia came up to Rajpura, 
exacted a ransom of money and horses from the chief there and, on the next day, camped in 
the state of Chhota Udaipur. Baroad now lay only fifty miles off! 
But there were numerous English armies in hot pursuit trying to capture him. The enemies’ 
troops used to proceed exactly on the line of his march, and it is most wonderful how he used 
to escape from their nets. At Chhota Udaipur, Parke came in with Tatia, and so Tatia had to 
give up the Baroda plan. Leaving the west aside, Tatia with his army marched again to the 
north and entered the jungles of Vasvara. But now, the Nabob of Banda had taken advantage 
of the Proclamation of the Queen of England and had laid down his arms. Tatia and Rao 
Sahib, the two leaders, were caught in a net which could not possible be broken through. On 
the south there was the Narbada, on the west was Roberts and his army, on the north and east 
lay the steep and impassable Ghats! If, in such a state, Tatia and Rao had surrendered, who 
could have blamed them? But glory be to them that even in such a state they did not 
surrender! An English author, in surprise and admiration, writes : “But, these two men were, 
in this hour of supreme danger, as cool, as bold, as fertile in resource as at any period of their careers.”4 On the 11th of December, Tatia came out of the jungle, obtained some provisions, 
from a Killadar and began to march straight on the city of Udaipur! But, immediately several 
English armies fell upon him. So, he had to give up the design and re-enter the jungle. It 
seemed now evident that Tatia could not hold out for more than a week at the most and must 
eventually surrender. So the Revolutionary leaders began to discuss whether it was now 
necessary to give up the struggle. The place was not a jungle but a veritable cage into which 
the Mahratta tiger had been driven from all sides. Not only were English armies ready on 
every side, but they were narrowing the cordon every moment. Still Tatia would not think of 
giving up the fight. He and Rao Sahib one day marched out in the direction of Pratapgarh. It 
was now about four in the afternoon. Tatia’s army had scarcely come out of the jungle when 
390 Major Rocke came up and blocked his way. Not that Tatia did not know that this part of the 
cage was also barred. But he took his choice and thought that this bar was the least strong of 
all, and so the tiger at once made an attempt to rush out there. Tatia’s men marched straight 
on Major Rocke’s troops and silenced them after a sudden onslaught. And thus the cage was 
broken through once again. The English commandants had to hand down their heads in 
shame! 
On the 25th of December, 1858, Tatia left the Vasvara jungle. About the same time, Feroze 
Shah, the illustrious hero whose work in Oudh has been described in a previous chapter, was coming with his army to meet Tatia.5 This Prince Mirza Feroze Shah was a worthy son of the 
4. Malleson’s Indian Mutiny, Vol. V, p. 247. 
5. “One of the great results that have flowed from the rebellion of 1857-1858 has 
been to make inhabitants of every part of India acquainted with each other. We have seen the 
tide of war rolling from Nepal to the borders of Gujarat, from the deserts of Rajputana to the 
frontiers of the Nizam’s territories, the same men overrunning the whole land of India and 
giving to their resistance, as it were, a national character. The paltry interests of isolated 
states, the ignorance which men of one petty principality have laboured under in considering 
the habits and customs of other principalities – all this has disappeared to make way for a 
more uniform appreciation of public events throughout India. We may assume that, in the 
rebellion of 1857, no national spirit was aroused, but we cannot deny that our efforts to put it 
down have sown the seeds of a new plant and thus laid the foundation for more energetic 
attempts on the part of the people if, in the course of future years, England has not done 
something towards reconciling the numerous inconcistencies and suppressing some of the dangerous tendencies of its rule in India.” – The Times, 20th of May, 1859. 
Delhi dynasty. His marvellous exploit of crossing the Ganges and the Jumna, and the 
subsequent march up to where Tatia was, cannot be described in detail for want of spare. 
Advancing to meet Feroze Shah and a Revolutionary Sirdar of the court of the Scindia called 
Man Singh, Rao Sahib and Tatia after many marches and skirmishes arrived at last at Indragarh on the 13th of January, 1859. And there the four leaders stopped for some time, 
discussing plans for future action. Tatia had always minute and correct information about the 
movements of the English. Seeing that they were closing round him again on all sides, Tatia 
arrived by forced marches at Dewasa. Now at last Tatia had not the smallest loophole through 
which to escape from the hands of the English. He had not even any hope of future success in 
his heart to encourage him to make another adventurous dash. Napier hemmed him from the 
391 
north, Showers from the north-west, Somerset from the east, Smith from the south-east, 
Michel and Benson on the south, Bonner on the south-west and west; - thus, on all sides, he 
was surrounded by the enemy. Where and how could he with his fatigued men find a means 
of escape from these and other English forces? The English commandants swore that escape 
was absolutely impossible. How was it possible for Tatia to break through the net closing 
around him? It did in very deed seem impossible. The English cords were now tightly round 
the necks of the four leaders, Feroze Shah, Man Singh, Tatia, and Rao Sahib. It was not 
impossible to escape! 
At Dewasa, on the morning of the 16th of January, 1859, Tatia, Rao Sahib, and Feroze Shah 
were discussing plans in a special council of war, when suddenly the last shout of despair was 
heard! Tatia felt an Englishman’s hand at his back and the English had flooded into the camp. 
There was a joyous shout on the English side : “Tatia is caught! Tatia is caught!” But soon 
the cry had to be varied. “Oh! He was here only just now! Run, soldiers, run!” They carried 
an exhaustive search in each and every corner – but Tatia had disappeared! 
That magician Tatia was to be seen again, together with Rao Sahib and Feroze at the town of Sikhar, near Alwar, on the 21st of January, and English forces were again running madly in 
pursuit. One of them, Holmes, actually fought a skirmish with the Revolutionaries, who were 
defeated and pushed back. 
The defeat at Sikhar destroyed not the hope of success of the Revolutionaries – that was gone 
even long before – but it made any further resistance absolutely impossible. Since the failure 
of the Baroda plan, after the crossing of the Narbada, Tatia and Rao Sahib had been 
discussing as to whether the guerilla tactics should be modified at last. Now, Tatia took leave 
of Rao Sahib and the army. He took with him two horses, a pony, two Brahmin cooks, and a 
man-servant. With these followers, Tatia came up to Sirdar Man Singh of Gwalior who was, 
at the time, hiding in the Paron jungles. Man Singh said to him, “You did not do well in 
leaving the army.” Tatia replied, “Let that be for better or for worse I am now going to stay with you. I am tired of continual marching.”6 Hearing that Tatia was now hiding with Man 
Singh in the jungle, the English now resorted to the plan of capturing through the base, and 
for them handy, instrument of treachery and deceit, the enemy whom they could not capture 
in open war. First, they approached Man Singh. They told him that if he would surrender 
himself and help them in capturing Tatia, they would use their influence with the Scindia and 
not only have him pardoned but give him the kingdom of Narwar. This Man Singh was of 
392 
such a base nature that he had before this tried to hand over even his own uncle to the 
English. The wretched Man, at once, consented and closed with the offer. He saw Tatia and 
informed him that he was going to surrender to the English. But, even after this, Tatia would 
not even think of surrender. Feroze Shah had just written to him to return to the camp. Tatia 
showed the letter to Man Singh and asked him “Shall I then go or remain in this jungle? I will 
do as you tell me.” The treacherous Man replied, “Wait for some time; I will soon let you 
know.” Though Tatia knew that Man Singh had surrendered to the English, he reposed full 
confidence in him. Man added, “Until I return, you can remain in safety where my guide will 
take you to.” In the place showed by the guide, believing it to be the safest place, Tatia 
remained for three days. But on the third day, at midnight, the Mahratta tiger, who had 
hitherto evaded the enemy after fighting innumerable battles and skirmished, marching 
thousands of miles, and effecting hair-breadth escapes, was, by the treachery of a 
countryman, made a prisoner. 
For, giving Tatia in charge of guide, the basest-born of men returned to the English; hands 
were shaken to complete the agreement, and some Sepoys of the Bombay native regiment 
were sent to accompany Man. Such was the sympathy with Tatia in all Indian hearts that the 
English could not trust any Indian with him, as a rule. So, they did not even mention Tatia’s 
name to the Sepoys. The order was simply “to obey Man Singh’s orders and to arrest the 
suspected person whom he would point out.” With this detachment, Man went his way to the 
6. From Tatia’s Diary. 
Paron jungle. He had promised Tatia to return in three days to tell him definitely whether he 
should go to Feroze Shah or not. And, he came at the appointed time, too. At midnight, on 
the third day, Tatia was asleep in the place pointed out by the guide as the safest. Man came 
near the place and muttered an order to the Sepoys to rush forth. The Mahratta tiger was 
sound asleep in that jungle – the “Beman Man’ let loose on him his hounds; Tatia just opened 
his eyes a little, and at once found himself a prisoner of the English! 
On the 7th of April, 1859, at midnight, Tatia fell into this prison of treachery, and on the next 
day in the early morning, he was taken to the camp of General Meade at Sipri. Immediately, a 
393 
court-martial sat and Tatia was charged with waging war against the British Power. On 
Wednesday, Tatia wrote down his statement in reply. “Whatever I did, I did according to the 
orders of my master. Until Kalpi, I was under the orders of Nana Sahib, after Kalpi I was 
under Rao Sahib. Except in just battle, in warfare, neither I not Nana have ever killed in cold 
blood or hanged any European, man, woman, or child. I do not want to take part in this trial 
any more.” At the special request of the English, Tatia dictated his reliable, short, and 
important diary from the beginning to the end of the Revolution. The Munshi wrote it down 
and it was read out to him. Afterwards, he signed the diary as well as the statement given 
above in good English letters, “Tatia Tope”. To all questions asked to him, he replied in 
Hindusthani, in the sense of the diary and the statement. His replies were straight, short, and 
spirited. If anyone asked him question in English, he would reply coolly in Hindusthani, 
“Malum nahin,” (I don’t understand). When minor English officers were walking about 
insolently near him, there was a look of indifference and disdain on his face. The inquiry 
lasted through Wednesday, Thurdsay, and Friday. Crowds of Indians used to come up to see 
him, but permission was often refused them. Those who were admitted bowed to him with 
reverence and affection. When the English informed him that his trial was to take place and 
asked him to collect evidence for his defence, Tatia replied to the officer, “I know full well 
that, having fought against the British as I have done, I shall have to prepare myself for death. 
I do not want any court nor do I wish to take any part in the trial;” and raising up his hands 
loaded with shackles, he continued, “the only hope that I have is to get myself released from 
these chains either from the mouth of the cannon or from the loop of the gallows! Only one 
thing I have to ask, and that is, that, my family at Gwalior having had no connection with my 
actions, you should not take my old father to any task for my deeds. 
On the 18th of April, the farce, called his trial, ended. Tatia was sentenced to death and take to 
the gallows at about four o’clock in the afternoon. He was taken out of his tent under the guard of the 3rd Bengal Europeans. When Tatia approached the place where the gallows 
stood, the troops formed an extended square round it. There was a great crowd of Indian 
infantry, European cavalry, and the spectators. In the country surroinding, Indian villagers 
were standing up on eminences here and there. Tatia once again made a request that his father 
should not be persecuted. The charge and the sentence were read, and the Mistri broke the 
chains round Tatia’s feet. Tatia walked boldly and with a firm step to the gallows and coolly 
ascended up the ladder. When, as is the custom, the executioners came up to bind Tatia’s 
hands and feet on the platform, Tatia smiled pleasantly, and said, “These formalities are not 
394 
necessary.” With these words he himself put forth his head in the noose. The noose tightened, 
the block rose, and with a jerk..... 
Tatia Tope, the loyal servant of the Peshwas, the hero of 1857, the country’s mortyr, the 
defender of religion, the proud, the loving, the generous Tatia Tope, was hanging lifeless on 
the gallows of the English! The gallows became wet with blood and the country became wet 
with tears! His fault was that he suffered innumerable hardships for the sake of his country’s 
independence; the baseness of a traitor’s double-dealing was his reward; and the end? – he 
was hanged on the gallows of the English like a criminal! Tatia! On! Tatia! Why were you 
ever born in our unfortunate country! Why did you fight for these wretched, stupid, and 
treacherous people? Tatia, can you see now the tears we shed for you? For the tears of 
weaklings, your blood! – What a bargain, indeed! 
Seeing Tatia’s body hanging mutilated there, the English heroes of the day turned back in 
satisfaction at their valour. His bleeding body was left hanging there till sunset. When the 
surrounding guard was withdrawn, the European spectators rushed forth in a crowd and there 
was a regular stampede to get hold of a lock of his hair as a souvenir. 
In the sactificial fire of the War of Independence of 1857, this was the last and culminating 
sacrifice! 
The terrible volcano, which had oepned wide its jaws and had vomited forth in rage a regular 
torrent of flesh, of blood, of corpses, of lightnings, of thunders, of burning red lava – that 
volcano then began to close its mouth again; its heated lava began to cool; its sword-tongues 
re-entered their scabbards; its fiery lightnings, its deafening thunders, its whirl-winds, its 
terrible movings, and its dread awakenings – all entered again the magicians’ bag and melted 
away into the invisible air. And the crater closed and green grass began again to grow on the 
top; cultivation recommenced; furrows were active; peace, safety, and softness reigned. And 
the surface of the volcano has now become so soft and smiling that nobody does believe that 
there slumbers a volcano under that surface! 
395 
CHAPTER-III CONCLUSION 
NOW that the volcano has temporarily subsided, renders might, however, ask what became 
of Feroze Shah and Rao Sahib? 
After leaving Tatia, Rao Sahib fought desperately for a month and at last retired to the forests 
in disguise. At the end of about three years, he was also caught and was handed at Cawnpore 
396 
on the 20th of August, 1862. Feroze Shah was also roaming about in disguise, but, 
fortunately, in the end, he got out of India and stayed at Kerbela in Persia. 
The Revolution of 1857, as such has been discussed, from time to time. Did the Revolution 
burst out too early, before the preparations were ripe? We think not. The preparations that 
were made in 1857 are not usually found even in successful revolutions. When regiment upon 
regiment of soldiers, Princes, higher officers of the existing government, the police, and large 
towns, all, one after another, gave promises to rise, who would not start at once? Besides, it is 
often the case that the real difficulty is at the start and the whole country rised only later on. 
This consideration also proves that the leaders of the Revolution did not at all precipitate 
matters. Those who dare not rise even with so many facilities are not the men who can ever 
rise at all! 
Then, why was there the defeat? Several minor reasons have already been mentioned in their 
proper places. But the chief reason appears to be this. Though the plan of the destructive part 
of the Revolution was complete, its creative part was not attractive enough. Nobody was 
against destroying the English power; but what about the future? If it was only to re-establish 
the former internecine strife, if it was to bring again the same state of affairs as before, the 
same Moguls, the same Mahrattas, and the same old quarrels – a condition, being tired of 
which, the nation, in a moment of mad folly, allowed foreigners to come in – if it were only 
for this, the more ignorant of the populace did not think it worth while to shed their blood for 
it. Therefore, the Revolution worked out successfully as far as the destructive part was 
concerned; but, as soon as the time for construction came, indifference, mutual fear, and want 
of confidence sprang up. If there had been set clearly before the people at large a new ideal 
attractive enough to captivate their hearts, the growth and completion of the Revolution 
would have been as successful and as grand as its beginning. 
Even had these people thoroughly understood at least so much that creation comes only after 
the Deluge, the Revolution would have succeeded. But, let alone creation, the country could 
not accomplish even the deluge thoroughly! And, why? Because, the vice of treachery and 
baseness had not yet gone away from the land. The defeat was chiefly due to the treachery of 
those men who had not sense enough to understand that the English power was more harmful 
than even the former kind of Swaraj ever could bem and of those who had not the honesty and patriotism to refuse to give help to the foreigner against their own countrymen.1 
397 
And the whole sin of this defeat lies on the head of these traitors! Had there been a clear and 
attractive ideal, even the traitors would have become patriots. When patriotism is profitable 
and paying, there is no advantage in playing the risky and shameful part of the betrayer. 
There is no special merit in that. The real glory belongs to those heroes who thoroughly 
1. “Yet it must be admitted that, with all their courage, they (the British) would have 
been quite exterminated if the natives had been all and altogether, hostile to them. The 
desperate defences made by the garrisons were no doubt heroic; but the natives shared their 
glory, and they by their aid and presence rendered the defence possible. Our siege of Delhi 
would have been quite impossible, if the Rajas of Patiala and Jhind had not been our friends 
and if the Sikhs had not recruited in our battalions and remained quiet in the Punjab. The 
Sikhs at Lucknow did good service, and in all cases our garrisons were helped, fed, and 
served by the natives, as our armies were attended and strengthened by them in the field. 
Look at us all, here in camp, at this moment! Our outposts are native troops, natives are 
cutting grass for our horses and grooming them, feeding the elephants, managing the 
transports, supplyingthe commissariat which feeds us, cooking our soldiers’ food, clearing 
their camp, pitching and carrying their tents, waiting on our officers, and even lending us 
their money. The soldier who acts as my amanuensis declares that his regiment would not 
have lived a week but for the regimental servants, Doli bearers, hospital men, and other 
dependants. Gurkha guides did good service at Delhi and the Bengal artillerymen were as 
much exposed as the Europeans.” – Russell’s My Diary in India. 
understood that foreign domination is worse than Swaraj – Swaraj, democratic or 
monarchical, or even anarchical – and thus came out to fight for independence. Freedom is 
coveted not that the country might become wealthy but because in it alone consists the peace 
of the soul; honour is greater than loss or gain; the forest of independence is better than the 
cage though made of gold. Those who understood this principle, those who fulfilled their 
duty to their religion and to their country, those who lifted their swords for Swadharma and 
Swaraj and courted death if not for victory at least for duty, let their names be remembered, 
pronounced with reverence! Those who did not join them in the wholy war, through 
indifference or hesitation, may their names never be remembered by their country. And, as 
for those who actually joined the enemy and fought against their own countrymen, may their 
names be for ever crushed! The Revolution of 1857 was a test to see how far India had come 
398 
towards unity, independence, and popular power.2 The fault of failure lies with the idle, 
effeminate, selfish, and treacherous men who ruined it. But those who, wielding the sword 
dripping with their own hot blood, in that great rehearsal, walked boldly on the stage of fire 
and danced in joy even on the very breast of Death – let no tongue dare to blame those 
heroes! They were not mad; they were not hasty; they were not the sharers of defeat; they 
were not inconsiderate; and, therefore, they cannot be blamed. It was at their call that Mother 
India woke up from her deep sleep and ran forth to smite slavery down. But while one of her 
sons gave a terrific blow on the head of Tyranny, alas! her other son thrust a dagger in her 
own heart! And the wounded Mother was thrown down on the ground again! Now, which of 
these two sons was wicked, cruel, treacherous, and accursed? 
2. “Among the many lessons the Indian mutiny conveys to the historian, none is of 
greater importance than the warning that it is possible to have a Revolution in which 
Brahmins and Sudras, Hindus and Mahomedans, could be united against us, and that it is not 
safe to support that the peace and stability of our dominions, in any great measure, depends 
on the continent being inhabited by different religious systems; for they mutually understand 
and respect and take a part in each other’s modes and ways and doings. The mutiny reminds 
us that our dominions rest on a thin crust ever likely to be rent by titanic fires of social 
changes and religious revolutions.” – Forrest’s Introduction. 
Emperor Bahadue Shah was a poet. During the heat of the Revolution he composed a Gazal. 
Some one asked him : 
Dumdumaymen dam nahin khair mango janki 
Ai Zafar thandi hui shamsher Hindusthanki. 
“Now that, every moment, you are becoming weaker, pray for your life (to the English) : for, 
Oh! Emperor, the sword of Inmdia is nowbroken for every!” 
There is a tradition that the Emperor replied : 
399 
Ghazionmen bu rahegi jabtalak imanki 
Tabto Londontak chalegi teg Hindusthanki. 
“As long as there remains the least trace of love of faith in the hearts of our heroes, so long, 
the sword of Hindusthan shall be sharp, and one day shall flash even at the gates of London.” 
VANDE MATARAM 
400